Vanderbilt University Undergraduate Catalog

Calendar 2017/2018
FALL SEMESTER 2017
Classes begin / Wednesday 23 August
Registration ends / Wednesday 30 August, 11:59 p.m.
Deadline to pay fall charges / Thursday 31 August
Family Weekend / Friday 15 September–Sunday 17 September
Homecoming and related activities / Sunday 1 October–Saturday 7 October
Fall break / Thursday 12 October–Friday 13 October
Thanksgiving holidays / Saturday 18 November–Sunday 26 November
Classes end / Thursday 7 December
Reading days and examinations / Friday 8 December–Saturday 16 December
Fall semester ends / Saturday 16 December
SPRING SEMESTER 2018
Deadline to pay spring charges / Tuesday 2 January
Classes begin / Monday 8 January
Registration ends / Monday 15 January, 11:59 p.m.
Spring holidays / Saturday 3 March–Sunday 11 March
Classes end / Monday 23 April
Reading days and examinations / Tuesday 24 April–Thursday 3 May
Commencement / Friday 11 May
MAYMESTER 2018
Classes begin / Monday 7 May
Classes end; examinations / Friday 1 June
SUMMER SESSION 2018
Classes begin / Tuesday 5 June
Examinations for first-half courses / Friday 6 July
Second-half courses begin / Tuesday 10 July
Examinations for second-half and full-term summer courses / Friday 10 August

Undergraduate
Catalog
College of Arts and Science
Blair School of Music
School of Engineering
Peabody College

1
Vanderbilt
University
2017/2018

Containing general information
and courses of study
for the 2017/2018 session
corrected to 16 June 2017
Nashville

The university reserves the right, through its established procedures, to modify the requirements for admission and graduation and to change other rules,
regulations, and provisions, including those stated in this catalog and other publications, and to refuse admission to any student, or to require the withdrawal of a student if it is determined to be in the interest of the student or the university. All students, full- or part-time, who are enrolled in Vanderbilt
courses are subject to the same policies. Policies concerning noncurricular matters and concerning withdrawal for medical or emotional reasons can be
found in the Student Handbook, which is on the Vanderbilt website at vanderbilt.edu/student_handbook.

NONDISCRIMINATION STATEMENT
In compliance with federal law, including the provisions of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendment of 1972, Sections
503 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990,the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, Executive Order
11246, the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 as amended by the Jobs for Veterans Act, and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, as amended, and the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, Vanderbilt University does not discriminate
against individuals on the basis of their race, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, color, national or ethnic origin, age, disability, military service,
covered veterans status, or genetic information in its administration of educational policies, programs, or activities; admissions policies; scholarship and
loan programs; athletic or other university-administered programs; or employment. In addition, the university does not discriminate against individuals on
the basis of their gender expression consistent with the university’s nondiscrimination policy. Inquiries or complaints should be directed to Anita J. Jenious,
J.D., Director and Title IX Coordinator; the Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Disability Services Department; Baker Building; PMB 401809, 2301
Vanderbilt Place; Nashville, TN 37240-1809. Telephone (615) 322-4705 (V/TDD); FAX (615) 343-4969.
Vanderbilt®, Vanderbilt University®, V Oak Leaf Design®, Star V Design® and Anchor Down® are trademarks of The Vanderbilt University. © 2017
Vanderbilt University. All rights reserved.
Produced by Vanderbilt University Creative Services and Vanderbilt Printing Services.
The text of this catalog is printed on recycled paper with ink made from renewable resources.
This publication is recyclable. Please recycle it.
Printed in the United States of America

Contents
The University

6

Special Programs for Undergraduates

10

Life at Vanderbilt

19

Admission

30

Financial Information

37

College of Arts and Science

47

A&S

Blair School of Music

241

B

School of Engineering

287

E

Peabody College

361

P

Index

416

6

vanderbilt university

The University

C

OMMODORE Cornelius Vanderbilt, who gave a million dollars to build and endow Vanderbilt University
in 1873, expressed the wish that it “contribute . . . to
strengthening the ties which should exist between all geographical sections of our common country.”
A little more than a hundred years later, the Vanderbilt
Board of Trust adopted the following mission statement:
“We reaffirm our belief in the unique and special contributions that Vanderbilt can make toward meeting the nation’s
requirements for scholarly teaching, training, investigation,
and service, and we reaffirm our conviction that to fulfill its
inherited responsibilities, Vanderbilt must relentlessly pursue
a lasting future and seek highest quality in its educational
undertakings.”
Today as Vanderbilt pursues its mission, the university
more than fulfills the Commodore’s hope. It is one of a few
independent universities with both a quality undergraduate program and a full range of graduate and professional
programs. It has a strong faculty of more than 3,800 full-time
members and a diverse student body of more than 12,500. Students from many regions, backgrounds, and disciplines come
together for multidisciplinary study and research.
The 330-acre campus is about one and one-half miles
from the downtown business district of the city of Nashville,
combining the advantages of an urban location with a peaceful, park-like setting of broad lawns, shaded paths, and quiet
plazas.
Off-campus facilities include Vanderbilt Dyer Observatory,
situated on a 1,131-foot hill six miles south.
The schools of the university offer the following degrees:
College of Arts and Science. Bachelor of Arts.
Blair School of Music. Bachelor of Music.
Divinity School. Master of Divinity, Master of Theological
Studies.
School of Engineering. Bachelor of Engineering, Bachelor of
Science, Master of Engineering.
Graduate School. Master of Arts, Master of Fine Arts,
Master of Liberal Arts and Science, Master of Science,
Doctor of Philosophy.
Law School. Master of Laws, Doctor of Jurisprudence.
School of Medicine. Master of Education of the Deaf,
Master of Public Health, Master of Science in Clinical Investigation, Master of Laboratory Investigation,
Master of Science in Medical Physics, Master of Science
(Applied Clinical Informatics, Speech-Language Pathology), Doctor of Audiology, Doctor of Medical Physics,
Doctor of Medicine.
School of Nursing. Master of Science in Nursing, Doctor of
Nursing Practice.
Owen Graduate School of Management. Master of Accountancy, Master of Business Administration, Master of
Management in Health Care, Master of Marketing,
Master of Science in Finance.
Peabody College. Bachelor of Science, Master of Education,
Master of Public Policy, Doctor of Education.
No honorary degrees are conferred.

Mission, Goals, and Values
Vanderbilt University is a center for scholarly research,
informed and creative teaching, and service to the community and society at large. Vanderbilt will uphold the highest
standards and be a leader in the
•
•
•

quest for new knowledge through scholarship,
dissemination of knowledge through teaching and
outreach,
creative experimentation of ideas and concepts.

In pursuit of these goals, Vanderbilt values most highly
•
•

intellectual freedom that supports open inquiry,
equality, compassion, and excellence in all endeavors.

Accreditation
Vanderbilt University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges to award
bachelor’s, master’s, professional, and doctoral degrees. Contact
the Commission on Colleges at 1866 Southern Lane, Decatur,
Georgia 30033-4097, call (404) 679-4500, or visit sacscoc.org for
questions about the accreditation of Vanderbilt University.
Please contact the commission only in relation to Vanderbilt’s noncompliance with accreditation requirements. Normal
inquiries about admission requirements, educational programs,
and financial aid should be directed to the university.
Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion
The Office for Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion is responsible
for advocating for institutional change, working with university
stakeholders to set goals and institutionalize accountability,
and ensuring that equity, diversity, and inclusion efforts are
coordinated throughout Vanderbilt University for students,
faculty, and staff. The office provides unconscious bias education, diversity education, campus conversations, and centralized
communication and promotion of diverse news and events.
Its mission is to be intentional about and accountable for the
advancement of equity, diversity, and inclusion in institutional
programs for the entire Vanderbilt University community. Visit
vanderbilt.edu/equity-diversity-inclusion for more information.
Jean and Alexander Heard Libraries
Vanderbilt’s Jean and Alexander Heard Libraries house
nearly five million items and provide access to millions more
resources through nine campus libraries: Central Library
(A&S); Peabody Library; Eskind Biomedical Library; Walker
Management Library; Wilson Music Library; Massey Law
Library; Stevenson Science and Engineering Library; Divinity
Library; and Special Collections Library. These libraries share
an online portal that provides access to an integrated catalog
of print and e-resources, as well as information about library
services, workshops, programs, exhibitions, research guides,
and librarian subject specialists.
Library staff teach students to be information literate and
help them develop research skills in an increasingly complex
information environment. Students can connect with a librarian in person or ask questions through the library website.

Undergraduate Catalog / The University

Library spaces across campus offer quiet individual study
spaces, group study, and instructional rooms, as well as learning commons and cafes. Faculty- and student-curated exhibitions throughout the libraries offer intellectual and creative
insights that encourage students to think critically and see
their own work in new ways. Students, faculty, and staff come
to the library to read in a cozy nook, meet friends for group
study, grab a quick meal, or see an exhibition. Even if you are
off campus, digital library resources are at your fingertips via
your phone, laptop, or computer.
The oldest item in the library dates from ca. 2500 BCE,
and new publications are being added every day. Among the
collection strengths are: Latin American history, politics, and
culture; the History of Medicine Collection; the W. T. Bandy
Center for Baudelaire and Modern French Studies; the Southern Literature and Culture Collections; and the Vanderbilt
Television News Archive, the world’s most extensive archive
of television news covering 1968 to present. The libraries are
also involved in digital scholarship, publishing and partnering with faculty on the Revised Common Lectionary, one of
the first published web-based resources of scriptural readings
for the liturgical year, Ecclesiastical and Secular Sources for
Slave Societies, a digital preservation program for endangered
documents related to slave societies, the Global Music Archive,
a multimedia archive for traditional and popular song, music,
and dance of Africa and the Americas, and Syriaca, a digital
project for the study of Syriac literature, culture, and history.
Get to know your libraries and your librarians early in
your career at Vanderbilt. The libraries have the information
you need and can help you transform that information into
knowledge, creativity, and success.
Information Technology
Vanderbilt University Information Technology (VUIT) offers
voice, video, data, computing, and conferencing services to
Vanderbilt students, faculty, and staff, and provides free antivirus downloads and malware prevention in the residence halls
and many campus areas.
VUIT maintains and supports VUnet, the campuswide data
network that provides access to the internet, and AccessVU, the
authentication service that enables Vanderbilt users to securely
identify themselves to many services on VUnet. Those services
include YES, Your Enrollment Services; Brightspace; and VU
Gmail, the university’s email system of choice for Vanderbilt
undergraduates.
It is important to note that many wireless consumer
electronic devices interfere with VUnet, and in worst-case
circumstances, could even cause degradation to network service.
These devices are prohibited and include, but are not limited to,
routers, access points (APs), or AirPorts manufactured by companies such as Apple, Belkin, D-Link, and Linksys. Additionally,
settings for smartphone hotspots and wireless connectivity for
printers and other devices must be disabled to prevent interference with university wireless APs.
VUIT partners with Sprint, Verizon, and AT&T to offer
discounts for cellular phone service. For discount information
see it.vanderbilt.edu/cellphone.
Vanderbilt offers all students low-cost and free-of-charge
software, including Microsoft Office and Microsoft Windows.
See softwarestore.vanderbilt.edu for a complete product catalog
and more information.
For campus residents, VUIT supports ResNet, which
provides a direct connection to VUnet and the internet. Cable

7

television ports are provided in each campus residence.
VUIT offers various conferencing and collaboration
services for students. In addition to Gmail at Vanderbilt,
undergraduates can enjoy Google drive and Google hangouts
(among other Google services) at gmail.vanderbilt.edu. Audio
and video conferencing are also available. See it.vanderbilt.
edu/services/collaboration for more information.
The Tech Hub provides information to students, faculty,
and staff about VUnet and VUnet services. Tech Hub locations, hours, contacts, and other information can be found at
it.vanderbilt.edu/techhub.
For more information on IT services and computing at
Vanderbilt, go to it.vanderbilt.edu.
Commencement
The university holds its annual Commencement ceremony
following the spring semester. Degree candidates must have
completed successfully all curriculum requirements and have
passed all prescribed examinations by the published deadlines
to be allowed to participate in the ceremony. A student completing degree requirements in the summer or fall semester
will be invited to participate in Commencement the following
May; however, the semester in which the degree was actually
earned will be the one recorded on the diploma and the student’s permanent record. Financially clear students unable to
participate in the graduation ceremony will receive their diplomas by mail. Please refer to the Commencement webpage at
vanderbilt.edu/commencement for complete information on
the May ceremony.

8

vanderbilt university

Vanderbilt University Board of Trust
BRUCE R. EVANS, Chairman, Boston, MA
JEFFREY J. ROTHSCHILD, Vice Chairman, Palo Alto, CA
JON WINKELRIED, Vice Chairman, Hobe Sound, FL
SHIRLEY M. COLLADO, Secretary, Ithaca, NY
NICHOLAS S. ZEPPOS, Chancellor of the University, Nashville, TN

GREG S. ALLEN
Charlottesville, VA

CARROLL E. KIMBALL
Nashville, TN

ALEXANDER C. TAYLOR, JR.
Atlanta, GA

LEE M. BASS
Fort Worth, TX

STEVEN H. MADDEN
Houston, TX

PATRICIA EARLY WHITE
Mayfair, England

ADOLPHO A. BIRCH III
New York, NY

MARK P. MAYS
San Antonio, TX

MARK WILF
Livingston, NJ

DANIEL M. CROWN
New York, NY

COURTNEY C. PASTRICK
Bethesda, MD

CHARLES H. ESSERMAN
Orinda, CA

DAVID W. PATTERSON, M.D.
Great Falls, VA

JAY C. HOAG
Palo Alto, CA

H. ROSS PEROT, JR.
Dallas, TX

JOHN R. INGRAM
Nashville, TN

SID SAPRU
Clarksville, MD

KATHLEEN E. JUSTICE-MOORE
Palo Alto, CA

ROBERT C. SCHIFF, JR., M.D.
Cincinnati, OH

Emerita/Emeritus Trustees
MARY BETH ADDERLEY
La Jolla, CA

JOHN R. HALL
Lexington, KY

J. STEPHEN TURNER
Nashville, TN

MICHAEL L. AINSLIE
Palm Beach, FL

L. HALL HARDAWAY, JR.
Nashville, TN

EUGENE H. VAUGHAN
Houston, TX

WILLIAM W. BAIN, JR.
Naples, FL

H. RODES HART
Brentwood, TN

DUDLEY BROWN WHITE
Nashville, TN

DARRYL D. BERGER
New Orleans, LA

JOANNE F. HAYES
Gulf Stream, FL

W. RIDLEY WILLS II
Nashville, TN

CAMILLA DIETZ BERGERON
New York, NY

MARTHA R. INGRAM
Nashville, TN

J. LAWRENCE WILSON
Bonita Springs, FL

DENNIS C. BOTTORFF
Nashville, TN

J. HICKS LANIER
Atlanta, GA

REBECCA WEBB WILSON
Memphis, TN

LEWIS M. BRANSCOMB
La Jolla, CA

EDWARD A. MALLOY, C.S.C.
Notre Dame, IN

WILLIAM M. WILSON
Nashville, TN

THOMAS F. CONE
Nashville, TN

JACKSON W. MOORE
Memphis, TN

CECIL D. CONLEE
Atlanta, GA

KENNETH L. ROBERTS
Nashville, TN

BROWNLEE O. CURREY, JR.
Nashville, TN

JOE L. ROBY
New York, NY

MARK F. DALTON
Scarsdale, NY

EUGENE B. SHANKS, JR.
Greenwich, CT

CLAIBORNE P. DEMING
El Dorado, AR

RICHARD H. SINKFIELD
Atlanta, GA

FRANK A. GODCHAUX III
Houston, TX

CAL TURNER
Franklin, TN

MARIBETH GERACIOTI, Secretary to the
Board of Trust

Undergraduate Catalog / The University

Vanderbilt University Administration
NICHOLAS S. ZEPPOS, J.D., Chancellor
SUSAN R. WENTE, Ph.D., Provost and Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs
AUDREY J. ANDERSON, J.D., Vice Chancellor, General Counsel, and Secretary of the University
STEVE ERTEL, B.A., Vice Chancellor for Communications
NATHAN GREEN, B.B.A., Interim Vice Chancellor for Public Affairs
ANDERS W. HALL, M.B.A., Vice Chancellor for Investments and Chief Investment Officer
ERIC C. KOPSTAIN, M.B.A., Vice Chancellor for Administration
JOHN M. LUTZ, A.B., Vice Chancellor for Information Technology
TINA L. SMITH, Ed.D., Interim Vice Chancellor for Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion and Interim Chief Diversity Officer
SUSIE S. STALCUP, B.B.A., C.F.P., Vice Chancellor for Development and Alumni Relations
BRETT SWEET, M.B.A., Vice Chancellor for Finance and Chief Financial Officer
DAVID WILLIAMS II, J.D., LL.M., M.B.A., Vice Chancellor for Athletics and University Affairs and Athletics Director

Deans
JEFFREY R. BALSER, M.D., Ph.D., Dean of the School of Medicine
MARK D. BANDAS, Ph.D., Associate Provost and Dean of Students
VANESSA BEASLEY, Ph.D., Dean of The Martha Rivers Ingram Commons
CAMILLA PERSSON BENBOW, Ed.D., Dean of Peabody College
LAUREN A. BENTON, Ph.D., Dean of the College of Arts and Science
DOUGLAS L. CHRISTIANSEN, Ph.D., Vice Provost for University Enrollment Affairs and Dean of Admissions and Financial Aid
PHILIPPE M. FAUCHET, Ph.D., Dean of the School of Engineering
CHRIS GUTHRIE, J.D., Dean of the Law School
M. ERIC JOHNSON, Ph.D., Dean of Owen Graduate School of Management
LINDA D. NORMAN, D.S.N., Dean of the School of Nursing
EMILIE M. TOWNES, Ph.D., Dean of the Divinity School
MARK WAIT, D.M.A., Dean of Blair School of Music
MARK T. WALLACE, Ph.D., Dean of the Graduate School

9

10

vanderbilt university

Special Programs for Undergraduates
Study Abroad
Vanderbilt offers study abroad opportunities for all undergraduate students from the College of Arts and Science, Blair
School of Music, School of Engineering, and Peabody College.
Programs are available for the semester, full academic year,
summer, and Maymester. Students may study abroad any time
after their freshman year at Vanderbilt. Through Vanderbilt
study abroad programs with our own resident directors and
through additional programs provided by agreements with
other universities and providers, Vanderbilt students can take
direct credit courses in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, China, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
the Dominican Republic, Egypt, France, Germany, Hungary,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Morocco,
Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Russia, Samoa, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Uganda,
the United Kingdom, and Vietnam.
Study abroad programs are open to students in good
academic, financial, and disciplinary standing, with an overall
grade point average of 2.700 or better, or a grade point average
at this level in each of the two most recent semesters. Many
programs require a higher grade point average and, with the
exception of Vanderbilt’s program in France, the student’s
application must also be approved by the appropriate host
university, institute, or consortium. Study abroad programs that
are either managed or approved by Vanderbilt offer direct credit
toward the Vanderbilt degree. With the exception of AXLE
credit, hours earned through these programs and approved in
advance by the appropriate department are treated as if earned
on the Nashville campus and serve to satisfy the residence
requirement (see the chapter on Academic Regulations).
Students studying on Vanderbilt programs or Vanderbiltapproved programs for the academic year or semester are
eligible for federal and VU financial aid. This includes merit
scholarships but excludes work-study. All participants in
direct-credit programs are billed through Vanderbilt Student
Accounts and must pay Vanderbilt tuition, an administrative
fee, and a program fee, which includes housing and international health insurance.
It should be noted, however, that if a program has been
approved for direct credit by Vanderbilt, it must be taken
for direct credit by matriculated Vanderbilt students. In no
case, after matriculating at Vanderbilt, may a student apply to
participate in an approved direct-credit program for transfer
credit through a different university, or through an external
agency, and then seek to transfer that credit into Vanderbilt.
Other study abroad programs may be approved for transfer
credit by the dean of the student’s college/school. Information
is available from the Global Education Office (GEO), Suite 103,
Student Life Center, and at vanderbilt.edu/geo.
Vanderbilt Programs and Exchange Programs
The oldest Vanderbilt study abroad program is in Aix-enProvence, France. Vanderbilt in France gives students the
opportunity to develop or acquire French skills while also
taking French- or English-language courses in a variety of
subjects. Residence in France may be for the academic year,
the fall or spring semester, or the summer.

The Consortium for Advanced Studies Abroad (CASA) is a
partnership of leading universities including Vanderbilt. CASA
focuses on offering high-quality study abroad opportunities
in select locations around the world. Vanderbilt students can
attend CASA programs in Havana, Cuba, and Seville, Spain.
A range of exchange programs offer students an opportunity to study at a partner university. The Institut d’Études Politiques in Paris is a world-renowned institution for study of the
social sciences, where Vanderbilt students can learn alongside
peers from France and all around the world. At the Politecnico
di Torino in Italy, mechanical engineering students can take
a variety of courses focused on interdisciplinary and technical excellence. Through the Killam Fellowships Program,
administered by Fulbright Canada, students can spend either a
semester or a full academic year as an exchange student at one
of more than fifteen universities in Canada. At City University of Hong Kong and the Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, engineering students can take courses in
engineering, science, and other disciplines in a fast-growing
and international city. Budapest University of Technology and
Economics offers courses in new interdisciplinary engineering
fields. In the Netherlands, Utrecht University and its two honors colleges offer English-language course work in a variety of
disciplines including history, economics, math, and the social
sciences. Australia’s University of Melbourne offers a full
selection of courses, including courses through the Victorian
College of the Arts and Music. At the National University of
Singapore, students may receive credit in a variety of engineering disciplines. For a complete list of exchange programs, visit
vanderbilt.edu/geo.
In addition, programs are offered via direct enrollment at
the University of the Balearic Islands in Palma de Mallorca,
Spain; at American University in Cairo, Egypt; at Hebrew
University in Jerusalem, Israel; in Metz, France, for engineering students in affiliation with the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech); in Dresden, Germany, for engineering
students in affiliation with Boston University; and in Rome,
Italy, through the Intercollegiate Center for Classical Studies
(ICCS). The ICCS is a consortium of thirty-seven universities
and colleges and is open only to majors in the Program in
Classical and Mediterranean Studies. Applications for all of
the listed programs are processed through the Global Education Office (GEO). Visit vanderbilt.edu/geo.
Vanderbilt-Approved Programs
Through arrangements with the Council on International
Educational Exchange (CIEE), CET Academic Programs
(CET), Study Abroad in Scandinavia (DIS), Institute for the
International Education of Students (IES), the Institute for
Study Abroad (IFSA) at Butler University, Frontiers Abroad,
the Alliance for Global Education (AGE), and the School for
International Training (SIT), Vanderbilt students may select
from a wide range of study abroad opportunities.
The Council on International Educational Exchange (CIEE)
offers programs with a focus on cultural immersion in Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, the Dominican Republic,
Japan, Russia, Senegal, South Africa, and Spain. CET sponsors
Vanderbilt-approved programs in Beijing, Harbin, Kunming,

Undergraduate Catalog / Special Programs for Undergraduates

and Shanghai, China; Florence and Siena, Italy; and Prague,
Czech Republic. DIS Copenhagen offers course work in English
in multiple subject areas, including European culture and history, politics and society, international business and economics,
medical practice and policy, marine and environmental biology,
psychology and child development, and more. Through the IES
programs in Vienna, Austria, and Amsterdam, the Netherlands,
qualified students can pursue course work in music studies
(performance, composition, history, and theory) as well as other
disciplines. Through IFSA Butler, qualified students can study
in Australia, England, Ireland, New Zealand, Northern Ireland,
and Scotland. Frontiers Abroad offers Vanderbilt students the
opportunity to study earth and environmental sciences in New
Zealand, both in classrooms at the University of Auckland or
the University of Canterbury and in field camp courses and on
research projects. Through AGE, students may take course work
in the social sciences in Pune, India. Programs offered by SIT
in Brazil, Chile, India, Jordan, Kenya, Morocco, Nepal, Samoa,
Serbia, Switzerland, Uganda, and Vietnam are centered on
independent research projects. For a complete list of approved
programs, visit vanderbilt.edu/geo.

Vanderbilt Experiential Learning Programs
The Office of Active Citizenship and Service (OACS) offers a
number of global and domestic experiential learning programs.
These programs offer students opportunities to volunteer in
Nashville, to develop leadership skills through organizational
management, to improve foreign language proficiency, and to
work with NGOs in the U.S. and abroad. For specific information about the different programs, contact OACS in 304 Sarratt
Student Center|Rand Hall or visit vanderbilt.edu/oacs/programs.

Joint and Dual Programs
Vanderbilt undergraduates in Blair School of Music, School
of Engineering, and Peabody College take their background
liberal arts and science courses in the College of Arts and
Science—and may take other elective courses in these areas
as individual degree programs will allow. In like manner,
students in the College of Arts and Science may take courses
in the other schools for regular credit toward the liberal arts
degree. Students may earn a second major or minor outside of
their school, as well.
Several dual programs, combining undergraduate study
with work toward a master’s degree, may make possible saving
a year in the time required to complete both degrees. Details
of the various dual programs will be found in the appropriate
school sections of this catalog.

Preparation for Careers in the
Health Professions
Study programs leading to careers in medicine, dentistry, veterinary science, pharmacy science, and many related areas are
under the general supervision of Professor Michelle Grundy,
director of the Health Professions Advisory Office.
Medicine
There is no formal premedical program of courses at Vanderbilt. Each student should plan a program to meet individual
requirements. Premedical studies should include whatever

11

courses may be necessary to meet medical school admission
requirements and to satisfy the requirements of the student’s
undergraduate degree program. Students interested in
premedical studies should plan their undergraduate programs
in consultation with Professor Grundy and their primary
academic adviser. Details of the 2017 MCAT and additional
useful information are at as.vanderbilt.edu/hpao.
Students are encouraged to consult the directory Medical
School Admission Requirements: United States and Canada,
published online by the Association of American Medical Colleges, as a guide to planning their undergraduate programs. A
link to the guide can be found on the HPAO website. Additional information on preparation for medical study can be
found in the College of Arts and Science section of this book.
See the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine Catalog
for the official statement on minimum requirements for
admission to Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.
Nursing
Students interested in nursing may earn both a baccalaureate degree in a non-nursing major and a master of science
in nursing (M.S.N.) degree in five calendar years. Interested
students apply for admission to either the College of Arts and
Science or Peabody College and indicate on their applications
that pre-nursing is their intended program of studies. In addition to their faculty advisers in the College of Arts and Science
or Peabody, pre-nursing students will be assigned faculty
advisers in the School of Nursing to assist them in planning
their program of studies.
Pre-nursing students in the College of Arts and Science
obtain both the baccalaureate degree and the M.S.N. degree
by combining three and one-half years (a minimum of 105
earned hours) of study in the College of Arts and Science with
six semesters of study in the School of Nursing. Students will
receive the baccalaureate from the College of Arts and Science
at the end of the eighth semester under the senior-in-absentia
program, and the M.S.N. from the School of Nursing after
completing a minimum of five additional consecutive semesters
of study. This program of study requires that students complete
the general curriculum requirements (including AXLE and
major) for the baccalaureate degree and satisfy the prerequisite
courses for admission to the School of Nursing. The first three
semesters in nursing are accelerated generalist nursing courses
and serve as a “bridge” into the Master of Science in Nursing program by preparing students for the NCLEX exam to
become a Registered Nurse (R.N.). These courses also provide
the foundation equivalent to the bachelor’s degree in nursing
for course work in the selected nursing specialty. Upon completion of three semesters of pre-specialty courses, students enter a
minimum of an additional three-semester sequence of courses
in their declared specialty in order to earn the M.S.N. degree.
Students must apply to the School of Nursing and to the
Administrative Committee of the College of Arts and Science
for admission to the senior-in-absentia program by November 1 of their junior year. Students are subject to all School of
Nursing admission requirements, and no student is assured of
admission to the School of Nursing. Up to 16 hours of School
of Nursing courses approved by the College of Arts and Science may be counted toward completion of the undergraduate
degree. Upon acceptance to the School of Nursing, students
will be assigned an adviser and should schedule an advising
appointment.

12

Pre-nursing students at Peabody College may either
(a) complete a major in child development and earn a B.S.
through a senior-in-absentia program or (b) complete a major
in human and organizational development and earn a B.S.
through a senior-in-absentia program. Upon admission to
the School of Nursing, the student is required to complete six
semesters (two calendar years) of full-time study to earn the
M.S.N. Additional information may be found in the Peabody
College section of this catalog.
Admission to the Graduate Nursing Program. Prior to
admission to the School of Nursing, applicants must have
completed prerequisite courses, including the following:
A required introductory course in statistics that includes
descriptive and inferential statistical techniques;
Mathematics 1010–1011, Mathematics 2820, or Peabody
Psychology 2110 will fulfill this requirement.
Eleven hours of natural science courses. Courses in human
anatomy and physiology (Nursing 3101 and 3102) and
microbiology (Nursing 1500) are required.
Three hours of lifespan development are required. Human
and Organizational Development 1250, Applied Human
Development; or Peabody Psychology 1250, Developmental Psychology, will fulfill the lifespan development
requirement.
Two hours of nutrition are required. Nursing 1601, Introduction to Nutritional Health, fulfills the requirement for
nutrition.
Admission to the School of Nursing is competitive. Consult
the School of Nursing catalog for specific requirements and
admission procedures. Students are encouraged to write or
call the School of Nursing’s Office of Admissions, 217 Godchaux Hall, Nashville, Tennessee 37240, (615) 322-3800, or see
the website, nursing.vanderbilt.edu, for further explanation of
pre-nursing and graduate nursing programs.

Preparation for Other Professional Careers
Architecture, Law, and Journalism
Undergraduate students expecting to pursue architecture, law,
or journalism at the graduate level may earn any major at
Vanderbilt, but should be aware of graduate field requirements.
See the chapter on Special Programs in the College of Arts and
Science section of this catalog.
Teacher Licensure Programs
Vanderbilt offers programs through Peabody College leading
to licensure for teaching. Students seeking teacher licensure
should refer to the Peabody College section of this catalog.
Students seeking licensure in music should see the Blair
School of Music section of this catalog.
Undergraduate students in the College of Arts and Science,
Blair School of Music, the School of Engineering, or Peabody
College who are seeking licensure in early childhood, elementary, or secondary education must complete a major outside
of teacher education and a Peabody College education major.
Licensure in special education fields does not require a second
major.

vanderbilt university

Undergraduate Business Minor
Vanderbilt University offers a transinstitutional, interdisciplinary undergraduate minor in business that is jointly administered by the Blair School of Music, the College of Arts and
Science, the Owen Graduate School of Management, Peabody
College, and the School of Engineering. The undergraduate
business minor requires 16.5 credit hours and is directed by
Gary Kimball.
The undergraduate business minor (BUS) provides students
with a rigorous exposure to the fundamental business disciplines of financial reporting, finance, organizational behavior,
marketing, and operations. The undergraduate business minor
also intentionally grounds the study of business within the liberal arts tradition, allowing students to understand the context
within which business operates in society.
Students declaring the undergraduate business minor
(BUS) may not also declare any of the minors in human and
organizational development (HOD), engineering management
(ENGM), or managerial studies minors in corporate strategy
(MGCS) and financial economics (FNEC). Students electing the undergraduate business minor must follow academic
regulations regarding minors in their home school, including
but not limited to regulations regarding unique hours. Due
to the offering of the undergraduate business minor, first-year
students entering in the fall of 2016 or later may not declare
the minors in managerial studies.
Four of the five mandatory courses in the undergraduate
business minor require one of the following prerequisites,
which may be completed in any order or simultaneously;
Advanced Placement (AP) or International Baccalaureate (IB)
credit may be used to satisfy the Microeconomics prerequisite.
1. Introductory Microeconomics: ECON 1020
2. Introductory Statistics: One of BME 3200, ECON 1500,
ECON 1510, MATH 1011, MATH 2810, MATH 2820,
MATH 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100

The Undergraduate Business Minor
The undergraduate business minor (BUS) requires 16.5 credit
hours of course work, distributed as follows:
1. 7.5 credit hours of required course work composed of 5
half-semester courses listed below. While not required, it
is recommended that students complete the five required
courses prior to fulfilling the elective requirement.
BUS 2100
BUS 2300
BUS 2400
BUS 2600
BUS 2700

Essentials of Financial Reporting
Principles of Finance
Organizational Behavior
Principles of Marketing
Managing Operations

(1.5 hours)
(1.5 hours)
(1.5 hours)
(1.5 hours)
(1.5 hours)

2. At least 6 credit hours of courses selected from one or
more of the seven “BUS pathways” (entrepreneurship,
ethics, finance and accounting, marketing and advertising,
operations, organizational effectiveness, and strategy).
3. At least 3 credit hours of courses selected either from the
“BUS pathways” or from the “business-in-society” electives.
“Business-in-society” electives represent business-related
disciplines in the liberal arts tradition, and are listed following the “BUS pathway” electives below.

Undergraduate Catalog / Special Programs for Undergraduates

BUS Pathways
Entrepreneurship
ENGM 3600 Technology-based Entrepreneurship
MGRL 2300 Entrepreneurship: The Business Planning Process
MGRL 3300 Entrepreneurial Challenge
MGRL 3841 Directed Study: Entrepreneurial Studio
SOC 3206
Creativity and Innovation in Society
Ethics
HODC 3232
PHIL 1100
PHIL 3609

Ethics for Human Development Professionals
Introduction to Business Ethics
Ethics and Business

Finance and Accounting
ECON 2300 Money and Banking
ECON 3200 Public Finance
ECON 3300 Financial Instruments and Markets
ECON 3610 International Finance
FNEC 1605 Advanced Financial Accounting
FNEC 2600 Managerial Accounting
FNEC 2705 Advanced Corporate Finance
FNEC 3700 Investment Analysis
FNEC 3705 Financial Management
FNEC 3710 Corporate Valuation
Marketing and Advertising
ENGM 3200 Technology Marketing
MGRL 3200 Advanced Marketing
MGRL 3209 Creative Advertising
MGRL 3891 Selected Topics in Managerial Studies – Advertising Studio
Operations
ENGM 3000
ENGM 3650
ENGM 3700

Enterprise Systems Design
Operations and Supply Chain Management
Project Management

Organizational Effectiveness
CMST 2120 Organizational and Managerial Communication
HODI 3240
Effectiveness in International For-Profit Organizations
HODL 3204 Leadership Theory and Practice
HODL 3224 Analyzing Organizational Effectiveness
HODL 3234 Advanced Organizational Theory
HODL 3244 Introduction to Human Resource Development
HODL 3254 Human Resource Management
HODL 3264 Evidence-based Practice in Organizations
HODL 3274 Managing Organizational Change
HODL 3314 Strategic Planning and Project Management
Industrial and Organizational Psychology
PSY 3605
SOC 3615
Human Behavior in Organizations
Strategy
ECON 2160
ECON 3250
ECON 4260
MGRL 3105
MGRL 3110
MGRL 3255

Strategic Analysis
Industrial Organization
Game Theory with Economic Applications
Negotiation
Business Management
Advanced Corporate Strategy

Business-in-Society Electives
ANTH 3135
ANTH 4153
CHIN 4401
CHIN 4402
ECON 2100
ECON 2150
ECON 2220
ECON 3100
ECON 3160

Development, Social Enterprise, Social Injustice
Economic Anthropology
Business Chinese I
Business Chinese II
Labor Economics
U.S. Economic History
Latin American Development
Wages, Employment, and Labor Markets
Economic History of Europe

13
FREN 3111
GER 2216
HIST 1600
HIST 1640
HIST 1660
HIST 2138

French for Business
Business German
European Economic History, 1000-1700
History of American Capitalism
American Enterprise
Blood Diamonds, Blood Oil, Commodities, and Conflicts
in Africa
HIST 3190
Religion, Culture, and Commerce: the World Economy
in Historical Perspective
HIST 3200
Poverty, Economy, and Society in Sub-Saharan Africa
HODL 3890 Special Topics: Introduction to Data Science: Using Data
for Understanding
MENT 1120 The Business of Music
MENT 1130 Building Communities through Music and the Arts
[1 credit hour]
MENT 1135 Arts Administration: Best Practices and Careers in the
Arts Organization [1 credit hour]
MENT 1140 Creating Funding and Nonprofit Vehicles for 21st-Century
Community Service [2 credit hours]
PSY-PC 2120 Statistical Analysis (second course in sequence)
PSY-PC 3735 Correlation and Regression
PSY-PC 3749 Applied Nonparametric Statistics
SOC 1020
Contemporary Social Issues: Corporations and Society
(only this emphasis)
SOC 3316
Business, Civil Society, and the Environment
SOC 3318
Sociology of Green Jobs
SPAN 3345
Spanish for Business and Economics

Course Descriptions
BUS 2100. Essentials of Financial Reporting. Emphasis on mandated
corporate disclosure. Economic concepts that guide the development
and use of accounting conventions as well as the institutional context that
disciplines producers and users. Prerequisite: ECON 1020. [1.5]
BUS 2300. Principles of Finance. Emphasis on asset valuation. Stock
and bond valuation, capital budgeting, cost of capital, market efficiency,
and company valuation. Prerequisite: 2100, ECON 1020, and one of BME
3200, ECON 1500, ECON 1510, MATH 1011, MATH 2810, MATH 2820,
MATH 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. [1.5]
BUS 2400. Organizational Behavior. Accomplishing goals by effectively
working for, with, and through others. The units of analysis explored are
individuals, teams, and organizations. [1.5]
BUS 2600. Principles of Marketing. Success in business is driven by
providing goods and services that consumers need and want. This course
covers how to achieve such success through analyses of companies, customers, and competitors, and making the right decisions regarding what
products to offer, and how to price, promote, and distribute them. Course
content spans a wide variety of settings including consumer goods, hitech, and service firms, and puts a particular emphasis on digital marketing opportunities and the evolving role of social media. Prerequisite: one of
BME 3200, ECON 1500, ECON 1510, MATH 1011, MATH 2810, MATH
2820, MATH 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. [1.5]
BUS 2700. Managing Operations. Provides an overview of operations
in both service and manufacturing organizations. Process analysis, queuing, inventory management, quality management, lean operations, and
optimization. Prerequisite: ECON 1020 and one of BME 3200, ECON
1500, ECON 1510, MATH 1011, MATH 2810, MATH 2820, MATH 2821,
PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. [1.5]

University Courses
By tackling pressing real-world problems and addressing big
questions, University Courses educate the whole student and
promote lifelong learning. The courses leverage the natural
synergies across Vanderbilt’s ten schools and colleges, giving
students the opportunity to reach beyond their area of study

14

and interact with faculty at the intersection of disciplines. Each
course promotes transinstitutional learning while providing opportunities to embrace diverse perspectives. For more
information, visit vu.edu/university-courses.

Officer Education Programs
Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC)
The Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC)
provides pre-commission training for college men and women
who desire to serve as commissioned officers in the United
States Air Force. When combined with the academic disciplines offered at the college level, the program provides the
student a broad-based knowledge of management, leadership,
and technical skills required for a commission and subsequent
active-duty service in the Air Force.
Graduates are commissioned as Second Lieutenants and
will enter active duty. The main objectives of producing officers through the AFROTC program are (1) to procure officers
with a broad educational base, (2) to provide a basic military
education for college students, (3) to teach fundamentals and
techniques of leadership, management, and decision making, and (4) to develop, in conjunction with other academic
disciplines, individual character and attributes required of a
commissioned officer in the United States Air Force.

AFROTC Program/Scholarships
Enrolling in AFROTC. Please go to www.tnstate.edu/afrotc for
application deadlines. Vanderbilt University students may
participate in the Air Force ROTC program in cooperation
with Tennessee State University. Call Detachment 790, (615)
963-5980, and ask for a Cross-Town Application. Mail this
application and your official transcripts with your immunization records back to Detachment 790. The program provides
training and education that will develop skills and attitudes
vital to the professional Air Force officer.
Students who participate in the Air Force ROTC program
must be enrolled at Vanderbilt University. The student is also
jointly enrolled as a TSU student and participates in Aerospace Studies (Air Force ROTC) at TSU. For more information, contact the unit admissions officer at (615) 963-5931/5979
or check our website at www.tnstate.edu/afrotc.
Currently there is no charge for tuition to take Air Force
ROTC. The grade and credit can transfer back for graduation
as indicated below.
Curriculum. The General Military Course (GMC) is composed of the first four semesters of aerospace studies (AERO)
and is for freshmen and sophomores. The Professional Officer
Course (POC) constitutes the final four semesters of AFROTC
study and enrolls juniors and seniors. The Leadership Lab is
required.

General Benefits
All students enrolled in the AFROTC program are provided
textbooks and uniforms at no expense. Professional Officer
Course (POC) students (juniors and seniors) and all scholarship
students receive a monthly subsistence allowance of up to $500
tax-free. Additionally, Vanderbilt University offers a generous
stipend to all AFROTC cadets.

vanderbilt university

Sponsored Activities
Arnold Air Society is a national society of AFROTC cadets
who excel in character and academics and exhibit interests in
the study of aerospace technology. The group meets at TSU.
Professional Development Training is provided during the
summers to cadets interested in enhancing their knowledge of Air
Force leadership and management opportunities, increasing their
cultural awareness, and learning about specific career specialties.
AFROTC Flight Orientation Program is designed to allow
all cadets, regardless of intended career field, the chance to fly
as front seat or back seat passengers in Civil Air Patrol aircraft.
Everyone can experience the joy of flight.

Aerospace Studies Courses at TSU
FRESHMAN YEAR
Foundations of the United States Air Force (no credit at Vanderbilt)
SOPHOMORE YEAR
The Evolution of USAF Air and Space Power (transfers as GNEL 2000)
JUNIOR YEAR
Air Force Leadership Studies (transfers as HOD 2051)
SENIOR YEAR
National Security Studies/Preparation for Active Duty (no credit at
Vanderbilt)

Army Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC)
The Army Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) is a
sequential and progressive academic program that provides
pre-commission training for college-educated men and
women who desire to serve as commissioned officers in the
active Army, Army Reserve, and Army National Guard. As the
Army’s largest commissioning source, it fulfills a vital role in
providing mature young men and women for leadership and
management positions in an increasingly technological Army.
Admission is open to both men and women who meet mental,
moral, and physical qualifications.
Training goes beyond the typical college classroom and
is designed to build individual confidence and self-discipline,
instill values and ethics, and develop leadership skills. The
course load consists of one course per semester. Each succeeding year will address course topics in greater depth as
students receive feedback on their leadership style and assume
positions of greater responsibility within the program. Graduates are commissioned as Second Lieutenants and will enter
active duty with follow-on employment in the Army Reserves,
National Guard, or active duty. Educational delays may be
granted for graduates who desire to pursue advanced degrees
prior to entry on active duty.
All university students in the Nashville area may participate
in the Army ROTC program at Vanderbilt University. While
Vanderbilt serves as the host university, students at partnership schools are not charged additional tuition to take military
science courses. Grades are transferred back to each university
and added to the students’ transcripts.
Scholarships. Students can earn merit scholarships in
several ways. High school seniors and graduates compete for
four-year scholarships that are determined by local competition among Vanderbilt applicants. Although determined
locally, the application process is centrally managed. Scholarship students receive financial benefits that cover the cost
of full tuition scholarships each year, an annual $1,200 book
allowance, all uniforms, and a monthly tax-free stipend
beginning at $300 for freshmen and increasing to $500 for

Undergraduate Catalog / Special Programs for Undergraduates

seniors. Vanderbilt University also provides Vanderbilt ROTC
scholarship students an additional $6,000 tuition grant each
year for room and board. Students who are not on scholarship
receive the monthly stipend during their junior and senior
years. All students enrolled in the Army ROTC program are
provided textbooks and uniforms at no expense. Contracted
non-scholarship students also receive the monthly stipend
from $300 to $500 depending on the academic level. For
more information, see the website at goarmy.com/rotc.html.
Summer training. Students have the opportunity to attend
several training events over the summer.
Advanced Camp — This five-week leadership exercise at
Fort Knox, Kentucky, is a commissioning requirement. This
is normally done between the junior and senior years. Travel,
room, and board are provided free, and cadets are paid
approximately $700.
Cultural Understanding and Language Program (CULP)
Internships — Students are encouraged to spend a semester,
special or summer session in academic studies abroad if feasible. Special incentives are available to further attract qualified
students to these valuable programs.
Cadet Troop and Leadership Training Internships (CTLT) —
CTLT Internships are leadership development opportunities for
students who are placed with military organizations throughout
the world to gain perspective and understanding on the role of
the military officer.
Cadet Professional Field Training (CPFT) — Airborne, Air
Assault, Mountain Warfare, Robin Sage (U.S. Special Forces),
Helicopter Flight Training, and Sapper.
Other training opportunities exist for qualified applicants
who are interested.
Commissioning and career opportunities. A commission in
the U.S. Army is a distinctive honor earned through hard work,
demonstrated commitment, and a desire to serve the nation.
Post-graduate military education, usually starting within six
months of graduation and commissioning and continuing
through the officer’s service career, begins with the basic officer
leadership course followed by officer basic course that qualify
new lieutenants in their specific branch of service. Education
delays are available for critical specialties requiring postgraduate civilian education such as law and medical degrees.
Course credit. During the four-year program, Army ROTC
students complete eight courses of military science plus associated labs. Academic credit varies by university.
Vanderbilt University College Credit: All AROTC courses
count toward elective credit. See course descriptions below.
Information. Inquiries regarding enrollment in the
Army ROTC program should be made to the Army ROTC
Admissions Officer at (615) 322-8550 or (800) 288-7682
(1-800-VUROTC). Also see vanderbilt.edu/army.

Military Science Department
COMMANDING OFFICER Brian D. Gilbert
MILITARY INSTRUCTORS Brian D. Gilbert, Gabriel C. Cleveland,
Matthew Mount, Christopher McGhee

Military Science Courses
During the four-year program, Army ROTC students
complete eight courses of military science plus associated labs,
and must complete an American Military History course and
Advanced Camp.

15
FIRST YEAR
MS-PC 1210. Leadership and Personal Development. (Formerly MS
111). Leadership is one of the most compelling topics of our time, and
might be one of the most important attributes for effectiveness in all levels of human endeavor. The success of one of the most admired and
respected institutions in our country, the military, is founded upon the understanding and effective application of leadership, and the development
of leaders. This course introduces students to the personal challenges
and competencies that are critical to effective leadership. The focus is on
developing basic knowledge and comprehension of leadership attributes
and core leader competencies in a universal setting and exploring potential applications of these principles and practices at Vanderbilt, in the
military and in the corporate world. [1]
MS-PC 1210L. Leadership and Personal Development Lab. (Formerly
MS 111a). Leader development is a continuous process of training, assessment and feedback with the goal of instilling and enhancing desirable behavior in individuals and organizations. Within the military science curriculum,
this process is called the Leadership Development Program (LDP), modeled
after the principles spelled out in Field Manual 22-100, Army Leadership,
and is standardized both on campus and in Advanced Camp environments.
The flexible methodology of LDP accommodates personalized, individual
development at all levels of proficiency throughout the officer educational
experience, from program entry to commissioning. The LDP includes basic leadership training, periodic assessment and counseling at both team
and individual levels by experienced observers. Trends and deficiencies are
identified and addressed with retraining and reassessment in a continuous cycle. Effective leader development is progressive, building on lessons
learned and maximizing individual potential. This course introduces students to the leadership development process by providing structured leadership opportunities in a variety of training settings. Student performance
in leadership roles is assessed and notable strengths and weaknesses are
identified. A plan for improvement is discussed in detail during one-on-one
counseling sessions. [1]
MS-PC 1230. Leadership and Personal Development II. (Formerly
MS 113). What motivates others to follow a person is intriguing, inspiring
and alluring. Through routine observation, we learn from leaders regardless of the setting (military, business, education, etc.). Leadership and
Personal Development II provides an overview of leadership fundamentals
such as setting direction, problem solving, listening and providing feedback. You will explore dimensions of leadership, values, attributes, skills,
and actions in a military context through practical, hands-on, and interactive exercises. [1]
MS-PC 1230L. Leadership and Personal Development II Lab. (Formerly MS 113a). Leader development is a continuous process of training,
assessment and feedback with the goal of instilling and enhancing desirable behavior in individuals and organizations; this process is called the
Leadership Development Program. Effective leader development is progressive, building on lessons learned and maximizing individual potential.
This course introduces students to the leadership development process by
providing structured leadership opportunities in a variety of training settings.
A plan for improvement is discussed in detail during one-on-one counseling sessions. [1]
SOPHOMORE YEAR

One American Military History course, chosen from the
following:
HIST 1730. The U.S. and the Cold War.
HIST 1740. The U.S. and the Vietnam War.
HIST 2720. World War II.
MS-PC 1510. American Military History: Principles of War.
Offered on a pass/fail basis only. [3]
PSCI 3272W. The War in Iraq, 2003–2011.

16
MS-PC 2150. Foundations of Leadership. MS-PC 2150 introduces the
process of understanding and defining leaders in order to develop leadership skills appropriate for future commissioned Army officers. This class is
broken down into five key skills development areas: 1) values and ethics,
2) personal development, 3) officership, 4) leadership, and 5) tactics and
techniques. The class emphasizes individual leadership values and characteristics with a focus on Leadership Theory and Interpersonal Communications, Army Values, Troop Leading Procedures, Problem Solving, and
Team Building in a military environment. [2]
MS-PC 2150L. Foundations of Leadership Lab. (Formerly MS-PC
150a). This lab builds upon the classroom topics in MS-PC 2150 and introduces the process of understanding and defining leaders in order to develop leadership skills appropriate for future commissioned Army officers.
The lab is broken down into five key skill development areas: 1) leadership,
2) values and ethics, 3) personal development, 4) professional officership,
and 5) various tactics, techniques, and procedures. The lab emphasizes
individual leadership values and characteristics with a focus on leadership
theory and interpersonal communications, Army values, troop leading procedures, problem solving, and team building in a military environment. [1]
MS-PC 2160. Foundations of Tactical Leadership. (Formerly MS 152).
MS-PC 2160 builds upon MS-PC 2150. The class is broken down into five
key skill development areas: 1) leadership, 2) values and ethics, 3) personal
development, 4) professional officership, and 5) various tactics, techniques,
and procedures. During this class we will focus on individual leadership
development where the student begins to plan, organize, and lead small
teams and groups in situational training exercises. Students begin to apply
leadership skills at the smallest unit level. [2]
MS-PC 2160L. Foundations of Tactical Leadership Lab. (Formerly MS
152a). MS-PC 2160L builds upon MS-PC 2150 and MS-PC 2150L. The lab
is broken down into five key skill development areas: 1) leadership, 2) values
and ethics, 3) personal development, 4) professional officership, and 5) various tactics, techniques, and procedures. During the lab we will focus on individual leadership development where the student begins to plan, organize,
and lead small teams and groups in situational training exercises. Students
begin to apply leadership skills at the smallest unit level. [1]
JUNIOR YEAR
MS-PC 3110. Leadership and Problem Solving. (Formerly MS 211).
This course builds upon your skills developed in MS-PC 2160 and continues to develop leadership, officership skills, self-awareness, and critical thinking skills through challenging scenarios related to small-unit tactical operations. Cadets receive systematic and specific feedback on their
leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions. Prerequisite: MS-PC 1210
(111), 1230 (113), 2150 (150), and 2160 (152). [3]
MS-PC 3120. Applied Team Leadership. (Formerly MS 212). Challenging scenarios related to small-unit tactical operations are used to develop
self-awareness and critical thinking skills. Students receive systematic and
specific feedback on their leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions.
Prerequisite: MS-PC 3110. [3]
SUMMER BETWEEN JUNIOR AND SENIOR YEAR

Cadet Leader Course (1 Cr) — All students pursuing a commission as an Army Officer must complete Advanced Camp during
the summer between their junior and senior year. Students may
apply for 1 credit hour of academic credit with the designation
of interdisciplinary internship (INDS 3881). This course may be
taken once and repeated once for a maximum of 2 credits on a
Pass/Fail basis only.
SENIOR YEAR
MS-PC 4150. Leadership and Ethics. (Formerly MS 251). Students develop proficiency in planning, executing, and assessing complex operations,
functioning as a member of a staff, and providing leadership-performance
feedback to subordinates. Students are given situational opportunities to
assess risk, make sound ethical decisions, and provide coaching and mentoring to fellow ROTC Cadets. Prerequisite: MS-PC 3120. [3]

vanderbilt university
MS-PC 4160. Leadership in a Complex World. (Formerly MS 252). This
course explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current
military operations in the contemporary operating environment. It introduces
the concept of culture, its components, how culture influences human behavior, the impact of culturally influenced behavior on military operations,
and how to analyze and apply cultural considerations in the planning and
execution of military operations. Prerequisite: MS-PC 4150. [3]

Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC)
The Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC) unit at
Vanderbilt conducts the Naval Officer Education program.
Challenging academic courses and experience-building
events prepare a select group of highly accomplished students
for the opportunity to serve their country as a Navy or Marine
Corps officer and receive an education. The primary focus of
the NROTC program is to develop the most capable leaders
possible by building upon the academic strength of Vanderbilt
and providing essential military and leadership education.
Students participate in the NROTC unit in the scholarship
program, the college program, or the naval science program.
College Program students take the prescribed naval science
course each semester, participate weekly in naval science lab,
and engage in summer training programs after each academic
year. The NROTC College Program is identical to the scholarship program except for tuition financial benefit and that students only participate in summer training upon completion of
their junior academic year. Also, any Vanderbilt student may
take any or all of the naval science courses without participating in naval science lab or summer training.
Scholarship students receive tuition, fees, uniforms, $375
per semester for textbooks, and a monthly stipend beginning at
$250 for freshmen and increasing to $400 for seniors. Vanderbilt may provide scholarship students with up to a $6,000-peryear stipend toward room and board. College Program students
are provided uniforms, textbooks for naval science courses, and
a monthly stipend of $350 upon commencement of their junior
year with approval by higher authority based on academic
performance and military aptitude.
Scholarships. Students can earn scholarships in several ways.
Four-year scholarships are determined by national competition
among high school seniors and graduates. Based on the national
ranking, students may be awarded a scholarship that covers full
tuition. To be eligible, applicants must have less than 30 semester hours of college credit. College Program students can also be
nominated for three- and two-year scholarships by the NROTC
unit. These nominations are based on the students’ academic
and military performance at the college level. Sophomores not
enrolled in the College Program are eligible to apply for the twoyear NROTC scholarship program. This is a national competition and application is made through the NROTC unit.
Service obligation. For most students at the beginning of
their sophomore year, should they choose to continue with
the NROTC program, Navy option scholarship students
incur a minimum service obligation of five years active duty,
and Marine option scholarship students incur a minimum
service obligation of four years of active duty, to be served
upon graduation or withdrawal from the program. College
Program students incur a three-year active duty commitment
upon graduation or withdrawal from the program. Additional
requirements may be required for specific job assignments.
Summer training. Summer training for three to four weeks
is conducted aboard naval vessels and naval shore stations after
each of the first three academic years. Scholarship students are
normally required to participate each year. All scholarship and

Undergraduate Catalog / Special Programs for Undergraduates

College Program midshipmen are required to participate in
summer training prior to their final academic year.
Course credit. During the four-year program, NROTC
Navy-option students are required to complete eight courses
(24 hours) of naval science, and Marine-option students are
required to complete six courses (18 hours) of naval science.
Academic credit awarded varies by course and is outlined in
the course descriptions below.
Required Courses for Navy/Marine Scholarship. The following courses are required for students on scholarship:
Calculus (Navy option only) (6 credits minimum): Mathematics 1200–1201, or 1300–1301 completed by the end
of the sophomore year.
Physics (Navy option only) (6 credits): 1501–1502 or
1601–1602 completed by the end of the junior year.
English (6 credits): Two semesters of any English course or
courses containing a designated writing component.
American History/National Security Policy (3 credits):
Contact the Naval ROTC unit for a listing of courses
fulfilling this requirement.
World Culture/Regional Studies (Navy option only) (3 credits): Contact the Naval ROTC unit for a listing of courses
fulfilling this requirement.
Information. Inquiries regarding enrollment in the Naval
ROTC program should be made to the Naval ROTC unit
recruiting officer at (615) 322-2671 or (800) 288-01183, or by
contacting a local Navy or Marine Corps recruiting station.
Admission to the program is open to both men and women.
Physical qualification to Naval Service standards is required.

Naval Science
COMMANDING OFFICER Ted Heflin
EXECUTIVE OFFICER Samuel Brasfield
MARINE INSTRUCTOR David Wood
NAVAL INSTRUCTORS Tyler McClean, Jesse Ochoa, John Underhill

Naval Science Courses
For Navy-option NROTC students, the following naval science courses are required for commissioning: NS 1100, HIST
1690, NS 2410, ES 3231, ES 3230, ES 3232, ES 4233, and NS-PC
4242 and their appropriate labs. For Marine-option NROTC
students, the following naval science courses are required
for commissioning: NS 1100, HIST 1690, NS 2410, HIST 1692,
HIST 1691, and NS-PC 4242 and their appropriate labs. For all
courses listed below, the associated lab sections are intended for
NROTC students only.
FIRST YEAR
NS 1100. Introduction to Naval Science. No credit toward current degree. [3]
HIST 1690. Sea Power in History. An introductory survey of the U.S.
Navy’s role in foreign and defense policies from the American Revolution to
the present. The course also examines the broad principles, concepts, and
elements of sea power throughout history. Key points will include technological advances, interservice relations, strategies, and governmental policies pertaining to sea power. This course is designed to meet the NROTC
requirement. SPRING. [3] (US)

17
SOPHOMORE YEAR
NS-PC 2410. Organization and Management. (Formerly NS 241). This
course presents a comprehensive study of organizational behavior and
management with special emphasis on situational leadership in the military
and civilian sectors and the development of your skills in organizational
thinking and problem solving. You will explore a variety of leadership and
management topics, including the classical theories of management, motivation, and communication. FALL. [3]
ES 3231. Navigation. (Formerly NS 231). Naval piloting procedures.
Charts, visual and electronic aids, and theory and operation of magnetic
and gyro compasses; inland and international rules of the nautical road. The
celestial coordinate system, including spherical trigonometry and application for navigation at sea. Environmental influences on naval operations.
SPRING. [3]
JUNIOR YEAR
ES 3230. Ships Engineering Systems. (Formerly NS 230). Ship characteristics and types, including design and control, propulsion, hydrodynamic forces, stability, compartmentation, and electrical and auxiliary
systems. Theory and design of steam, gas turbine, and nuclear propulsion. FALL. [3]
ES 3232. Ships Weapons Systems. (Formerly NS 232). Theory and
employment of weapons systems, including the processes of detection,
evaluation, threat analysis, weapon selection, delivery, guidance, and explosives. Fire control systems and major weapons types, including capabilities and limitations. Physical aspects of radar and underwater sound.
Command, control, communications, computers, cyber intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. SPRING. [3]
SENIOR YEAR
ES 3233. Naval Operations. (Formerly NS 233). A continued study of
relative motion, formation tactics and ship employment. Introduction to
Naval operations and operations analysis. Ship behavior and characteristics in maneuvering. Applied aspects of ship handling, afloat communications, naval command and control, naval warfare areas, and joint warfare
are also included. FALL. [3]
NS-PC 4242. Leadership and Ethics. (Formerly NS-PC 242). An exploration of major Western ethical philosophy in the development and application of leadership to enhance objective, sound and timely decision-making
in the most challenging of environments. This course follows theoretical
examination with case studies and practical application to emphasize the
importance of ethical reasoning to leadership, and explores components of
character and integrity in decision making. SPRING. [3]

The Marine option courses listed below are taught in the
spring, rotating on a yearly basis. They are taken in the sophomore and junior year.
History 1692. Evolution of Warfare. (Formerly NS 2311). Antiquity to
the present. Evolution of strategic principles. Influence of technological,
economic, moral, psychological, and political factors. Case studies from a
soldier’s perspective. [3] (No AXLE credit)
History 1693. Fundamentals of Maneuver Warfare. (Replaces HIST
1692 Amphibious Warfare). Broad aspects of warfare and their interactions with maneuver warfare doctrine. Specific focus on the United States
Marine Corps as the premier maneuver warfare fighting institution. Historical influences on current tactical, operational, and strategic implications of
maneuver warfare practices in current and future operations. Case studies. Enrollment preference to NROTC students. Repeat credit for students
who have completed HIST 169D or HIST 1692. [3]

18

Interdisciplinary Centers, Institutes, and
Research Groups
Vanderbilt actively promotes research and teaching that cross
disciplines, departments, and institutional lines through
a multitude of centers, institutes, and research groups.
Below is a sampling of Vanderbilt’s interdisciplinary initiatives. For more information, see research.vanderbilt.edu/
centers-institutes.
The Center for Integrative and Cognitive Neuroscience investigates
the relationship between brain function, behavior, and cognition, and promotes the development of new technologies like advanced prosthetics
and autonomous robots. cicn.vanderbilt.edu
The Center for Latin American Studies works to advance knowledge
about and understanding of the region’s history, culture, political economy,
and social organization. vanderbilt.edu/clas
The Center for Medicine, Health, and Society studies the social and
societal dimensions of health and illness. Scholarship, teaching, and wideranging collaborative projects explore medicine and science in a wide array of
cultural contexts, while at the same time fostering productive dialogue across
disciplinary boundaries. vanderbilt.edu/mhs
The Max Kade Center for European and German Studies fosters an
international perspective on issues relating to Europe and transatlantic
relations and seeks to prepare students for international careers or advanced study. as.vanderbilt.edu/europeanstudies
The National Center on School Choice conducts scientific, comprehensive, and timely studies on school choice to inform policy and practice.
vanderbilt.edu/schoolchoice
The Robert Penn Warren Center for the Humanities promotes interdisciplinary research and study in the humanities, social sciences, and
natural sciences. Members of the Vanderbilt community representing a
wide variety of specializations take part in the center’s programs, which
are designed to intensify and increase interdisciplinary discussion of academic, social, and cultural issues. vanderbilt.edu/rpw_center
The Vanderbilt Brain Institute promotes and facilitates the discovery efforts of Vanderbilt neuroscientists, the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and the coordination of public outreach in brain sciences. Research endeavors in the VBI include more than three hundred scientists from
fifty departments, centers, and institutes across the campus, spanning a
spectrum of study from molecules to the mind. braininstitute.vanderbilt.edu.
The Vanderbilt Initiative in Surgery and Engineering creates, develops, implements, and evaluates solutions to complex interventional problems. Physicians, engineers, and computer scientists work together to improve patient care with surgical innovation through engineering. Central to
the mission of the institute is the translation of methods, techniques, and
devices from the laboratory to the patient. vanderbilt.edu/vise
The Vanderbilt Institute for Energy and Environment elucidates the
relationships among individual, institutional, and societal choices for energy
production and use, and the impacts and benefits of these choices on the
environment and health through links with climate, water quality, economics,
social psychology, and natural resources. A crucial part of its mission is to
train the next generation of leaders in the energy and environmental arena.
vanderbilt.edu/viee
The Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health is committed to advancing
health and development in resource-limited regions with projects in Africa,
Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean. Vanderbilt faculty and staff provide
leadership and expertise in establishing sustainable, scalable health development programs. globalhealth.vanderbilt.edu
The Vanderbilt Institute for Integrative Biosystems Research and
Education fosters and enhances interdisciplinary research in the biophysical sciences and bioengineering at Vanderbilt, integrated with a strong focus
on undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral education. VIIBRE’s mission

vanderbilt university
is to invent the tools and develop the skills that are required to understand
biological systems across spatiotemporal scales. vanderbilt.edu/viibre
The Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology provides research and
training in the application of chemical approaches to the solution of important biomedical problems, harnessing the power of chemistry to improve
human health. vanderbilt.edu/vicb
The Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering
engages in theoretical and experimental research in science and engineering at the nanoscale (from one millionth to one billionth of a meter in
size). VINSE supports an extensive infrastructure of materials fabrication
and analytical facilities for research in nanoscale science and engineering.
vanderbilt.edu/vinse
The Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development facilitates discoveries and best practices that make positive differences in the lives of persons with disabilities and their families through
research, training, services, and dissemination. Nationally, it is among
fourteen Eunice Kennedy Shriver Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Centers, sixty-seven national University Centers for
Excellence in Developmental Disabilities, fifty-two Leadership Education in Neurodevelopmental Disabilities training programs, and includes
the Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorders.
Research, practicum, and clinical experiences are available to trainees.
vkc.mc.vanderbilt.edu
The Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging Science aims to support and integrate advances in physics, engineering, chemistry, computing, and other basic sciences for the development and application of new
and enhanced imaging techniques to address problems and stimulate
new research directions in biology and medicine, in health and disease.
vuiis.vanderbilt.edu
The Wond’ry supports immersive experiences for students and interdisciplinary projects for faculty—from all schools and colleges—who are interested in innovation and entrepreneurship. In addition to connecting various
resources across the university, the center serves as a common space for
students to develop and test ideas alongside their peers with mentorship
from faculty, alumni, corporate partners, the Nashville entrepreneurial community, and beyond. Programming, seminars, and workshops help students from all disciplines grow their ventures at any stage of development.
vanderbilt.edu/thewondry

Undergraduate Catalog / Life at Vanderbilt

19

Life at Vanderbilt
The Ingram Commons and the First-Year Experience
All undergraduates spend their first year at Vanderbilt living
on The Martha Rivers Ingram Commons. As part of Vanderbilt’s residential college system, The Ingram Commons brings
together first-year students, residential faculty, and professional staff in the common pursuit of discovery, creative
inquiry, and engaged citizenship. With a focus on bolstering
intellect, building community, developing skills for personal
well-being, pursuing self-discovery, and developing cultural
awareness, all members of The Ingram Commons participate
in a mutual exchange of ideas and experiences. The Ingram
Commons achieves that goal during the year through its ten
houses, the faculty heads of house appointed to mentor students in each of them, and a first-year experience of programs,
academic seminars, dinners, discussions, cultural events, social
activities, lectures, and guests.
The first-year experience begins with CommonVU, a
required orientation week for all first-year students. It extends
from Move-In Saturday through a first week of orientation
and academic classes. During CommonVU, students begin to
experience the new communities of their university—in their
houses, across The Ingram Commons and the university campus, and in their classrooms. Activities with each other, peer
mentors and other VU upperclass students, faculty heads of
house, educational staff, academic advisers, and other Vanderbilt professors introduce life at Vanderbilt.
The first-year experience also includes Vanderbilt Visions,
a required first-semester university core program of mentored
discussion concerning the expectations, norms, and values
required for a successful transition to undergraduate life.
Faculty and student VUceptors partner to lead each Vanderbilt Visions small group, whose members come from all ten
Ingram Commons houses and each of the four undergraduate schools and colleges. Groups meet weekly during the
fall semester. All first-year students will receive assignments
to a Vanderbilt Visions group on their class schedules. More
information can be found at commons.vanderbilt.edu.
Transfer Student Transition Programs
Transfer Student Orientation is Vanderbilt’s mandatory orientation program for all transfer students. During this time, new
transfer students will learn more about life at Vanderbilt through
programs and activities with university staff members, faculty,
and upperclass students known as Transfer Student Leaders.
Transfer students will receive orientation information in the
mail during the summer before arriving at Vanderbilt. Further
details can be found at vanderbilt.edu/transfer.
The Vanderbilt Honor Code and the Honor System
Vanderbilt University takes pride in its honor code and its
student-run honor system.
The honor code is shared by all ten schools of the university:
Vanderbilt University students pursue all academic endeavors with integrity. They conduct themselves honorably,
professionally, and respectfully in all realms of their studies
in order to promote and secure an atmosphere of dignity and
trust. The keystone of our honor system is self-regulation,

which requires cooperation and support from each member
of the University community.
The Honor System is a time-honored tradition that
began with the first classes at Vanderbilt in 1875. Students
established the system and continue to manage it today. It
rests on the presumption that all work submitted as part of
course requirements is produced by the student, without help
from any other source unless acknowledgement is given in a
manner prescribed by the instructor. Cheating, plagiarizing,
or otherwise falsifying results of study are specifically prohibited. The system applies not only to examinations but also to
written work and computer programs submitted to instructors. Detailed descriptions of Honor System violations and
Undergraduate Honor Council procedures are published in
the Student Handbook, available on the web at vanderbilt.edu/
student_handbook.
Responsibility for the preservation of the system falls on
the individual student who, by registration, acknowledges
the authority of the Undergraduate Honor Council. Students
are expected to demand of themselves and their fellow students complete respect for the Honor Code. Ignorance of
the regulations is not a defense for abuse of regulations. All
incoming students attend a mandatory signing ceremony and
educational program on the Honor System at the beginning
of the fall semester. Additional information about the Honor
System is available on the web at studentorgs.vanderbilt.edu/
HonorCouncil.
Student Accountability
All students who take courses, live in residence halls, or otherwise participate in the activities of the university are within the
jurisdiction of the university’s student accountability system,
whether or not they are registered primarily at Vanderbilt. Policies governing student conduct are published in the Student
Handbook, on the web at vanderbilt.edu/studentaccountability,
or by other reasonable means of notification. The Office of
Student Accountability, Community Standards, and Academic
Integrity has original jurisdiction over all matters of nonacademic misconduct involving students.
Official University Communications
Certain federal statutes require that information be delivered
to each student. Vanderbilt delivers much of this information via email. Official electronic notifications, including
those required by statutes, those required by university policy,
and instructions from university officials, will be sent to
students’ Vanderbilt email addresses: user.name@vanderbilt.
edu. Students are required to be familiar with the contents of
official university notifications, and to respond to instructions
and other official correspondence requiring a response. Some
messages will include links to the YES Communications Tool,
which is a secure channel for official communication of a confidential nature. However, students should not wait to receive
such a message, and should check YES frequently to remain
current on official, confidential communications.
The university makes every effort to avoid inundating
students with nonessential email (often called “spam”), and

20

maintains separate lists from which students may unsubscribe
for announcements of general interest.

Residential Living
Vanderbilt University requires all unmarried undergraduate
students to live in university housing on campus for their
entire undergraduate career. This commitment to residential
education is clearly expressed in the university’s residential
requirement: “All unmarried undergraduate students must
live in residence halls on campus during the academic year,
May session, and summer sessions. Authorization to live elsewhere is granted at the discretion of the director of housing
assignments in special situations or when space is unavailable
on campus” (Student Handbook).
Residential living at Vanderbilt began in the 1880s when
six cottages were constructed in response to a demand for
on-campus housing. In the fall of 2015, 6,077 students lived on
campus, comprising about 93 percent of the undergraduate
student body. Housing for graduate and professional students
is not available on campus.
Undergraduate Housing
Several types of housing are offered to meet the needs of a
diverse student body—suites, singles, doubles, apartments, and
lodges.
Some housing is segregated by gender; most housing is
coresidential. In the coresidential areas, men and women may
be housed in different living spaces on the same floor.
Six officers from each fraternity and sorority may live in
their fraternity or sorority houses.
TeleVU, the residence hall cable system, and ResNet, the
residential data network, are available in each accommodation
on campus. Residents with personal computers can connect
to ResNet for high-speed data services. All residence halls
provide wireless access to ResNet.

First-Year Students
First-year students live on The Martha Rivers Ingram Commons.
The Ingram Commons comprises ten residential houses, the
home of the dean of The Ingram Commons, and The Commons
Center. The ten houses are Crawford, East, Gillette, Hank Ingram,
Memorial, Murray, North, Stambaugh, Sutherland, and West.
Each house is led by a resident faculty head of house.
East, Gillette, Memorial, North, and West houses are historical buildings renovated for The Ingram Commons. Crawford,
Hank Ingram, Murray, Stambaugh, and Sutherland were constructed between 2006 and 2008. All houses are air conditioned
and fully sprinklered for fire safety. Access to all residence halls
is controlled with a card access system. Students on The Ingram
Commons live in traditional double or triple rooms. All student
rooms have basic room furnishings that include loftable bed,
chest, desk, chair, closet, and window blinds. Lounges, study
rooms, seminar rooms, music practice rooms, and laundry
facilities are located within The Ingram Commons.

Upperclass Students
Upperclass students live in nineteen residence halls in six
residential areas on the central campus: Warren and Moore
colleges, Alumni Lawn, Carmichael Towers East and West,
Branscomb Quadrangle, and Highland Quadrangle. All
residence halls are air conditioned and are fully equipped

vanderbilt university

with sprinklers for fire safety. Access to all residence halls is
controlled with a card access system.
Warren and Moore colleges are the first two residential
colleges for upperclass students in Vanderbilt’s College Halls
system. Together, the two colleges house 660 students comprising equal numbers of women and men. Two hundred and
twenty spaces are designated for each class cohort—seniors,
juniors, and sophomores. A faculty director lives in each
college and each is assisted by two graduate fellows who live in
residence. Each college offers a mix of living accommodations:
suites for six, five, and four students; traditional double rooms;
and traditional single rooms.
Alumni Lawn comprises McGill Hall, Cole and Tolman
halls, and McTyeire International House. McGill Hall houses
approximately one hundred students in primarily single
rooms with community bath facilities on each floor. Housing
slightly more than one hundred students each in single rooms,
Cole and Tolman halls house female and male populations,
respectively. McTyeire International House houses approximately one hundred students in single rooms with community
bath facilities on each floor.
Upperclass students are also housed in the fourteen-story
Carmichael Towers complex located on West End Avenue.
Carmichael has two styles of living arrangements: (a) single
and double rooms arranged in six-person suites with bath,
kitchen, and common area and (b) single and double rooms
arranged on halls, with community bath facilities on each
floor. The Towers are complete with lounges, meeting rooms,
laundry facilities, recreation areas, music practice rooms, a
convenience store, and a Food Court.
Branscomb Quadrangle (Lupton, Scales, Stapleton, and
Vaughn) offers two physical arrangements: (a) double rooms
with a community bath on each floor and (b) suites of two
double rooms connected by a half bath (with a community
bath on each floor). The complex contains laundry facilities,
lounges, study rooms, music practice rooms, and a quickservice restaurant and convenience store.
At the south end of the campus is Highland Quadrangle
comprising Chaffin Place, Lewis House, Morgan House, and
Mayfield Place. Chaffin contains two-bedroom apartments
that house four students. Students share efficiencies and oneand two-bedroom apartments in Morgan and Lewis houses. In
Mayfield, units of ten single rooms cluster around a two-story
living room area. A laundry facility and a convenience store
are located in this residential area.

Living Learning Communities
McGill Hall is the home of the McGill Project, designed to
stimulate and foster discussion and exploration of philosophical issues between students and faculty. Faculty members meet
with residents in McGill for informal discussion (open to all
students) and formal class work. Residents also plan and participate in social events hosted by the student-run McGill Council.
A faculty-in-residence lives on the first floor.
The goals of the McTyeire International House language
programs are to improve the fluency of McTyeire Hall
residents in Chinese, French, German, Japanese, Russian, or
Spanish languages, and to expand communication between
international and American students by means of discussions,
programs, and international coffees and festivals. An international interest hall is offered in English for students with
interest in global citizenship. Space is available for ninety-six
upperclass students in single rooms. Living in McTyeire

Undergraduate Catalog / Life at Vanderbilt

carries a commitment to take a predetermined number of
weekly meals in the McTyeire dining room.
Mayfield Place is the site for the Mayfield Living Learning
Lodge program. Lodges are set aside for groups of ten students
who want to establish their own special-interest lodges. Such
programs have included arts, community service, computers,
environment/recycling, world religions, music, and wellness.
Each lodge selects a faculty adviser who provides guidance
throughout the year.
Residential Education Administration
The residential community at Vanderbilt is divided into seven
geographic areas, each of which has a full-time professional
living on campus. Upperclass and graduate or professional
students serve as head residents and resident advisers in the
residence halls. The dean of students, eight area coordinators,
and six graduate area coordinators also live on campus. For
more information, go to vanderbilt.edu/ResEd.
Residence halls for first-year students have RAs on each
floor. Area coordinators and their student staff are responsible
for maintaining an atmosphere conducive to the students’
general welfare and education.
Vanderbilt Student Government (VSG) plans programs
and recreational and social activities, and advises the residential affairs administration on policy matters.

Room Assignment
First-Year Students. First-year students may apply for
housing after payment of their matriculation fees. Students
will be assigned to double or triple rooms. Roommate requests
are considered. However, when the supply of double rooms
is exhausted, roommate requests will not be honored for
students assigned to triple rooms. Admission to the university
does not guarantee assignment to a particular building, kind
of room, or a particular roommate or hallmate.
Returning Upperclass Students. Returning unmarried
upperclass students receive their housing assignments through
a random selection process in the spring. Students who want
to remain in the same rooms may reserve their rooms. Eligibility for participation is determined by the director of housing
assignments with advice from VSG. A specific number of
current residents of a suite, apartment, or lodge must return in
order to reserve that living space.
Transfer and Former Students. Requests for room assignments by new transfer students and former students returning
to campus are made through the Office of Housing and Residential Education, and are determined by the date of deposit.
The university tries to accommodate as many transfer students
as possible, but acceptance at Vanderbilt does not guarantee
campus housing.
The Commodore Card
The Commodore Card is the Vanderbilt student ID card. It can
be used to access debit spending accounts, VU meal plans, and
campus buildings such as residence halls, libraries, academic
buildings, and the Vanderbilt Recreation and Wellness Center.
ID cards are issued at the Commodore Card Office, 184
Sarratt Student Center, Monday through Friday from 8:30
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. For more information, go to vanderbilt.edu/
cardservices.

21

Eating on Campus
Vanderbilt Campus Dining’s meal plan program, VU Meal
Plans, gives students comprehensive dining options. Features
include extended hours, multiple locations, variety, special
events, Meal Money, Taste of Nashville (ToN) program, and
Flex Meals.
Vanderbilt students living on campus are required to
participate in VU Meal Plans. All first-year students are on the
First-Year Meal Plan. Other students may purchase the 8, 14,
or 19 Meal Plan.
There are a variety of options conveniently located across
campus. The Ingram Commons dining hall, Rand Dining Center, Pub at Overcup Oak, Grins Vegetarian Café, Chef James
Bistro, Last Drop Coffee Shop, the Kitchen at Kissam, Rocket
Subs, Bamboo Bistro, Pi and Leaf, Engineering Café, and Blair
Café all host the VU Meal Plans. Vanderbilt Campus Dining
also operates six convenience stores including Kissam Market,
Branscomb Market, and Common Grounds at The Commons
Center, which are open 24 hours and accept VU Meal Plans.
For more information on VU Meal Plans, go to campusdining.vanderbilt.edu/vu-meal-plans. For more information on
Vanderbilt Campus Dining, go to campusdining.vanderbilt.edu.
Barnes & Noble at Vanderbilt
Barnes & Noble at Vanderbilt, the campus bookstore located at
2525 West End Avenue, offers textbooks (new, used, digital, and
rental), computers, supplies, Nook e-readers, dorm accessories,
licensed Vanderbilt apparel, and best-selling books. Students
can order online or in-store and receive course materials
accurately, conveniently, and on time. The bookstore features
extended hours of operation and hosts regular special events.
Visitors to the bookstore café can enjoy Starbucks coffees,
sandwiches, and desserts while studying. Free customer parking
is available in the 2525 garage directly behind the bookstore. For
more information, visit vubookstore.com, follow twitter.com/
BN_Vanderbilt, find the bookstore on Facebook at facebook.
com/VanderbiltBooks, or call (615) 343-2665.

Services to Students
Student Records (Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act)
Vanderbilt University is subject to the provisions of federal law
known as the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (also
referred to as FERPA). This act affords matriculated students
certain rights with respect to their educational records. These
rights include:
1. The right to inspect and review their education records within 45
days of the day the University receives a request for access. Students
should submit to the University Registrar written requests that identify the
record(s) they wish to inspect. The University Registrar will make arrangements for access and notify the student of the time and place where the
records may be inspected. If the University Registrar does not maintain
the records, the student will be directed to the University official to whom
the request should be addressed.
2. The right to request the amendment of any part of their education records that a student believes is inaccurate or misleading. Students who
wish to request an amendment to their educational record should write the
University official responsible for the record, clearly identify the part of the
record they want changed, and specify why it is inaccurate or misleading. If
the University decides not to amend the record as requested by the student,

22
the student will be notified of the decision and advised of his or her right to
a hearing.
3. The right to consent to disclosures of personally identifiable information contained in the student’s education records to third parties, except
in situations that FERPA allows disclosure without the student’s consent.
These exceptions include:
• Disclosure to school officials with legitimate educational interests. A
“school official” is a person employed by the University in an administrative, supervisory, academic or research, or support-staff position
(including University law enforcement personnel and health staff);
contractors, consultants, and other outside service providers with
whom the University has contracted; a member of the Board of Trust;
or a student serving on an official University committee, such as the
Honor Council, Student Conduct Council, or a grievance committee,
or assisting another school official in performing his or her tasks. A
school official has a legitimate educational interest if the official needs
to review an education record in order to fulfill his or her professional
responsibility.
• Disclosure to parents if the student is a dependent for tax purposes.
• Disclosure to appropriate individuals (e.g., parents/guardians, spouses, housing staff, health care personnel, police, etc.) where disclosure
is in connection with a health or safety emergency and knowledge of
such information is necessary to protect the health or safety of the
student or other individuals.
• Disclosure to a parent or legal guardian of a student, information
regarding the student’s violation of any federal, state, or local law, or
of any rule or policy of the institution, governing the use or possession
of alcohol or a controlled substance if the University has determined
that the student has committed a disciplinary violation with respect to
the use or possession and the student is under the age of 21 at the
time of the disclosure to the parent/guardian.

FERPA provides the University the ability to designate
certain student information as “directory information.”
Directory information may be made available to any person
without the student’s consent unless the student gives notice
as provided for, below. Vanderbilt has designated the following as directory information: the student’s name, address,
telephone number, email address, student ID photos, major
field of study, school, classification, participation in officially
recognized activities and sports, weights and heights of members of athletic teams, dates of attendance, degrees and awards
received, the most recent previous educational agency or
institution attended by the student, and other information that
would not generally be considered harmful or an invasion of
privacy if disclosed. Any student who does not wish disclosure
of directory information should notify the University Registrar
in writing. No element of directory information as defined
above is released for students who request nondisclosure
except as required by statute.
The request for nondisclosure does not apply to class rosters in online class management applications, or to residential
rosters—or rosters of groups a student may join voluntarily—
in online, co-curricular engagement applications, or rosters
of other information on the websites of student organizations
that a student may join. Neither class rosters in online class
management applications, nor residential rosters in online cocurricular engagement applications, are available to the public.
As of January 3, 2012, the U.S. Department of Education’s FERPA regulations expand the circumstances under
which students’ education records and personally identifiable
information (PII) contained in such records—including Social
Security Numbers, grades, or other private information—may
be accessed without consent. First, the U.S. Comptroller General, the U.S. Attorney General, the U.S. Secretary of Education,

vanderbilt university

or state and local education authorities (“Federal and State
Authorities”) may allow access to student records and PII
without consent to any third party designated by a Federal or
State Authority to evaluate a federal- or state-supported education program. The evaluation may relate to any program that
is “principally engaged in the provision of education,” such as
early childhood education and job training, as well as any program that is administered by an education agency or institution.
Second, Federal and State Authorities may allow access to
education records and PII without consent, to researchers performing certain types of studies, in certain cases even when the
University objects to or does not request such research. Federal
and State Authorities must obtain certain use-restriction and
data security promises from the third parties that they authorize to receive PII, but the Authorities need not maintain direct
control over the third parties.
In addition, in connection with Statewide Longitudinal
Data Systems, State Authorities may collect, compile, permanently retain, and share without student consent, PII from
education records, and may track student participation in
education and other programs by linking such PII to other
personal information that they obtain from other Federal or
State data sources, including workforce development, unemployment insurance, child welfare, juvenile justice, military
service, and migrant student records systems.
If a student believes the University has failed to comply
with FERPA, he or she may file a complaint using the Student Complaint and Grievance Procedures as outlined in the
Student Handbook. If dissatisfied with the outcome of this procedure, students may file a written complaint with the Family
Policy Compliance Office, U.S. Department of Education, 400
Maryland Avenue SW, Washington, DC 20202-5920.
Questions about the application of the provisions of the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act should be directed
to the University Registrar or to the Office of General Counsel.

Vanderbilt Directory
Individual listings in the online People Finder Directory consist
of the student’s full name, Vanderbilt email address, and
campus mailing address (if available). Students may elect to
add additional contact information to their listings, including school, academic classification, local phone number, local
address, permanent address, cellphone, pager, and fax numbers.
Student listings in the People Finder Directory are available to
the Vanderbilt community via logon ID and e-password. Students may choose to make their online People Finder listings
available to the general public (i.e., viewable by anyone with
access to the internet), or to block individual directory items.
Students who have placed a directory hold with the University
Registrar will not be listed in the online directory.
Directory information should be kept current. Students may
report address changes, emergency contact information, and
missing person contact information via the web by logging in to
YES (Your Enrollment Services) https://yes.vanderbilt.edu and
clicking on the Address Change link.
Counseling and Advisory Services
Advising is an important part of Vanderbilt’s central mission
to help each student achieve individual goals. Many support
services are provided, including pre-major and major academic advising and career and personal counseling. Residence
hall staff are continuously on call.

Undergraduate Catalog / Life at Vanderbilt

Deans and professional staff in academic programs, in all
areas of the Office of the Dean of Students, and in other areas
of the university offer counseling and advising services to
students:
Career Center
Center for Student Wellbeing
Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Disability
		Services
Faculty Advisers
Health Professions Advisers
International Student and Scholar Services
Margaret Cuninggim Women’s Center
Office of Housing and Residential Education
Office of LGBTQI Life
Office of Student Activities
Office of Student Leadership Development
Office of the University Chaplain and Religious Life
Pre-Business Advisers
Pre-Law Advisers
Psychological and Counseling Center
STEM Help Desks in The Ingram Commons
STEM Help Desks in Featheringill
Student Health Center
Teacher Education Adviser, Arts and Science
Teacher Licensure Office, Peabody College
Tutoring Services
Writing Studio
Career Center
The Career Center prepares students for life after Vanderbilt
by helping them explore career options, develop professional
capabilities, discover their identities, and build resilience to be
competitive in a rapidly changing world.
Center coaches help students learn about and explore
professional opportunities, including career coaching appointments, workshops, career panels, Industry Career Days, and
field trips. Start mapping out your future by meeting with one
of the professional career coaches either during walk-in hours
or by scheduling an appointment.
Vanderbilt graduates go everywhere and your career is not
necessarily tied to your major. For example, English majors
may find themselves in the music industry, and engineering
majors may find themselves on Wall Street. By working with
a career coach students can explore their interests in various fields, learn how to tell the story of their education and
experience, and apply to work in whatever field of employment
interests them. For more information about the Career Center,
visit vanderbilt.edu/career.
Services for Students with Disabilities
Vanderbilt is committed to the provisions of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 and Americans with Disabilities Act as it strives
to be an inclusive community for students with disabilities.
Students seeking accommodations for any type of disability
are encouraged to contact the Equal Opportunity, Affirmative
Action, and Disability Services Department. Services include,
but are not limited to, extended time for testing, assistance
with locating sign language interpreters, audiotaped textbooks,
physical adaptations, notetakers, reading services, and reasonable accommodations for housing and dining. Accommodations are tailored to meet the needs of each student with a
documented disability. Specific concerns pertaining to services
for people with disabilities or any disability issue should be

23

directed to the Disability Program Director, Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Disability Services Department
(EAD), PMB 401809, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, Tennessee 37240-1809; phone (615) 322-4705 (V/TDD); fax (615)
343-0671; vanderbilt.edu/ead.
Nondiscrimination, Anti-Harassment, and AntiRetaliation
The Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Disability
Services Department investigates allegations of prohibited discrimination, harassment, and retaliation involving members of
the Vanderbilt community. This includes allegations of sexual
misconduct and other forms of power-based personal violence.
Vanderbilt’s Title IX coordinator is Anita Jenious, EAD director.
If you believe that a member of the Vanderbilt community
has engaged in prohibited discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation, please contact the EAD. If the offense is criminal in
nature, you may file a report with Vanderbilt University Police
Department (VUPD).
The EAD also facilitates interim accommodations for
students impacted by sexual misconduct and power-based
personal violence. Some examples of interim accommodations
include stay-away orders, adjusted course schedules, and housing changes.
Specific concerns pertaining to prohibited discrimination,
harassment, or retaliation, including allegations of sexual
misconduct and other forms of power-based personal violence,
should be directed to the Equal Opportunity, Affirmative
Action, and Disability Services Department (EAD), PMB
401809, 2301 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, Tennessee 372401809; phone (615) 322-4705 (V/TDD); fax (615) 343-0671;
vanderbilt.edu/ead.
Psychological and Counseling Center
As part of the Vanderbilt University Medical Center, the PCC
supports the mental health needs of all students to help them
reach their academic and personal goals. Highly skilled and
multidisciplinary staff collaborates with students to provide
evidence-based treatment plans tailored to each individual’s
unique background and needs. The PCC also emphasizes prevention through collaboration with campus partners, providing outreach and consultation focused on the development of
the skills and self-awareness needed to excel in a challenging
educational environment.
The PCC’s psychologists, licensed counselors, and psychiatric medical providers are available to any Vanderbilt student
and address a range of student needs including stress management, crisis intervention, substance abuse counseling, management of medications, individual counseling, group counseling,
biofeedback, emergency assessments, and psychiatric assessment and treatment. The PCC provides a team approach to the
care of students with eating disorders and students who have
experienced trauma as well as students needing both counseling and medication management. There is an on-call provider
after hours and on weekends for emergency calls.
The PCC provides screening and full assessment when
indicated for ADHD and learning disorders.
The PCC has a team that specializes in treatment of
substance misuse and collaborates with the Center for Student
Wellbeing to incorporate prevention and treatment resources.
The PCC also houses a Mind Body Lab. This room is
designed with the objective of enhancing mindfulness by providing tools to manage stress, increase personal resilience, and

24

promote compassion and academic success. Students may book
a forty-five-minute session in the PCC Mind Body Lab by calling the PCC at (615) 322-2571 or by stopping by the front desk.
Students and their parents are encouraged to make contact
with the PCC prior to the start of the school year if the student
has a history of mental health care needs. This will help facilitate the transition of care and ensure that students and parents
are fully aware of PCC resources. Contact the center at (615)
322-2571 for more information.
There is no charge for services with the exceptions of
reduced fees for LD/ADHD screening and assessment and
specific disability assessments when needed for academic or
environmental accommodations. Over the course of a year,
approximately 20 percent of the Vanderbilt student population will seek out the services of the PCC.
Throughout the year, the PCC team members also produce
presentations, including educational programs, thematic
presentations, and special events, focused on education of the
Vanderbilt community about mental health issues and resources.
The PCC is proud to provide a program focusing on suicide
prevention and mental health awareness at Vanderbilt called
MAPS: Mental Health Awareness and the Prevention of Suicide.
For more information, visit medschool.vanderbilt.edu/pcc.
Project Safe Center
The Project Safe Center partners with students, faculty, and
staff to create a campus culture that rejects sexual violence and
serves as a resource for all members of the Vanderbilt community. The Project Safe Center provides support to survivors of
intimate partner violence and engages the campus community
in prevention of sexual assault, dating violence and domestic
violence, and stalking.
Green Dot, a bystander intervention program used by
colleges and communities nationwide, an online education
module addressing sexual violence, and a variety of programs
and presentations on consent, healthy relationships, and violence prevention are available through the Project Safe Center.
A 24-hour support hotline answered by Project Safe’s victim
resource specialists is available at (615) 322-SAFE (7233).
The Project Safe Center located at 304 West Side Row is
open Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. For more
information, please call (615) 875-0660 or visit vanderbilt.edu/
projectsafe.
Student Health Center
The Student Health Center provides primary care services for
students and is staffed by physicians, nurse practitioners, nurses,
and lab technicians. The Student Health Center provides
services similar to those provided in a private physician’s office
or HMO, including routine medical care, specialty care (e.g.
nutrition and sports medicine), and some routine lab tests. Most
of the services students receive at the Student Health Center are
pre-paid, but those services that are not are the responsibility of
students to coordinate with their health insurance.
When the university is in session, during fall and spring
semesters, the Student Health Center is open Monday through
Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and Saturdays from 8:30 a.m.
to noon. Students should call ahead to schedule an appointment
at (615) 322-2427. Students with urgent problems will be seen on
a same-day basis. They will be given an appointment that day,
or “worked in” on a first-come, first-served basis, if no appointments are available.

vanderbilt university

Emergency consultations services (at (615) 322-2427) are
available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from on-call professionals. For more detailed information on the services available at
the Student Health Center and information on other healthrelated topics, please visit the Student Health Center website at
medschool.vanderbilt.edu/student-health.

Immunization Requirements
The State of Tennessee requires certain immunizations for all
students on university campuses. As such, Vanderbilt University will block student registration for those who are not in
compliance with the requirements.
The requirements include:
1. Meningococcal meningitis vaccine (one injection) within
four years of enrollment for all incoming students living
in on-campus housing.
2. Varicella vaccine (two injections) is required for all students who have not had documented chickenpox history.
Positive titer results are also accepted.
3. Measles, mumps, and rubella (2 injections) for all
incoming students. Positive titer results are also accepted.
The Student Health Center requires all incoming students to
complete a Health Questionnaire that includes further information regarding the state-mandated vaccinations, as well as
information on other strongly recommended vaccinations.
Information regarding this Health Questionnaire is communicated to students by email after admission to Vanderbilt
University. This Health Questionnaire must be returned
to the Student Health Center by May 15 with vaccination
information.
Students should go to medschool.vanderbilt.edu/
student-health/immunization-requirements in order to access
more information regarding the immunization requirements.
This site also contains links to the PDFs of the required forms
and information on how to upload documentation via the
secure student health portal.

Student Injury and Sickness Insurance Plan
All degree-seeking students, with the exception of Division of
Unclassified Studies (DUS) students, who are registered for 4
or more credit hours, are required to have health insurance
coverage. The university offers a sickness and injury insurance plan that is designed to provide hospital, surgical, and
major medical benefits. A brochure explaining the benefits
of insurance coverage is available to students online at gallagherstudent.com/vanderbilt or medschool.vanderbilt.edu/
student-health/student-health-insurance.
The annual premium is in addition to tuition and is automatically billed to the student’s account. Coverage extends
from August 12 until August 11 of the following year, whether
a student remains in school or is away from the university.
A student who does not want to subscribe to the insurance
plan offered through the university must complete an online
waiver form indicating other insurance coverage at
gallagherstudent.com/vanderbilt. This process must be
completed by August 1 for students enrolling in the fall. Newly
enrolled students for the spring term must complete the
online waiver process by January 2. The online waiver process
must be completed by August 1 every year in order to waive
participation in and the premium for the Student Injury and
Sickness Plan.

Undergraduate Catalog / Life at Vanderbilt

Family Coverage: Students who want to obtain coverage for
their families (spouse, children) may do so at gallagherstudent.
com/vanderbilt. Additional premiums are charged for family
health insurance coverage and cannot be put on a student’s
VU account.

International Student Coverage
International students and their dependents residing in the
United States are required to purchase the university’s international student injury and sickness insurance. If you have other
comparable insurance and do not wish to participate in the
Student Injury and Sickness Insurance Plan offered through the
university, you must complete an online waiver process
(gallagherstudent.com/vanderbilt) indicating your other insurance information. This online waiver process must be completed no later than September 7 or you will remain enrolled
in the plan offered by the university and will be responsible for
paying the insurance premium. This insurance is required for
part-time as well as full-time students.
Center for Student Wellbeing
The Center for Student Wellbeing seeks to create a campus
culture that supports students in cultivating lifelong wellbeing
practices. The center offers individual coaching appointments
to help students develop and maintain skills that will contribute to personal and academic success, and provides workshops
on a variety of topics, including resiliency, time management,
alcohol and other drug education, and healthy living. Students
may use the center’s meditation room for yoga, meditation,
and mindfulness classes, or for self-guided practice. The center
also works closely with many campus partners, including the
Psychological and Counseling Center, the Student Health Center, the Office of Housing and Residential Education, and the
academic deans to provide resources and support for students
who may be facing personal or academic challenges.
The Center for Student Wellbeing is centrally located
on campus at 1211 Stevenson Center Lane, across from the
Student Health Center, and is open Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. For more information, please call (615)
322-0480 or visit vanderbilt.edu/healthydores.
Vanderbilt Child and Family Center
The Vanderbilt Child and Family Center supports the health
and productivity of the Vanderbilt community by providing
resource and referral services and quality early childhood education and care to the children of faculty, staff, and students. The
center’s website at vanderbilt.edu/child-family-center provides
information concerning child care, elder care, summer camps,
tutoring services, and school-age child care. Care.com and
the Vanderbilt Sitter Service provide back-up care options for
dependents of all ages and evening, night, and weekend care.
The Child Care Center serves children ages six weeks
through five years. Applications for the waiting list may be
downloaded from the website. The Family Center offers a
monthly lunchtime series called “Boomers, Elders, and More”
and a caregiver support group.
Bishop Joseph Johnson Black Cultural Center
As part of the Office of the Dean of Students, the Bishop
Joseph Johnson Black Cultural Center provides educational
and cultural programming designed to highlight the history and cultural experiences of African Americans. Initially

25

referred to as “the Afro House,” in 1984, the center was named
in honor of the first African American student admitted to
Vanderbilt University in 1953, Bishop Joseph Johnson (B.D.
’54, Ph.D. ’58). The BCC activities focus on providing student
support and development, campus enrichment, and community engagement.

Student Support and Development (Inclusion)
One of the major aims of the BCC is student support and
development. To accomplish this objective, the BCC offers
student-driven programming, mentoring initiatives, organizational meeting spaces, service opportunities, and leadership
skills training. The BCC also serves as a haven for students,
with opportunities for informal fellowship with other students
of all levels and backgrounds as well as with faculty and staff.

Campus Enrichment (Diversity)
With campus programming focused on Africans and African
Americans, the BCC enriches the overall campus environment
by promoting intercultural competence. Specifically, the BCC
works with numerous campus partners to sponsor lectures,
musical performances, art exhibitions, films, and discussions
on African and African American history and culture.

Community Engagement (Equity)
Additionally, the BCC engages in community outreach and
service by working with various civic and cultural groups in
the Nashville area. Through community programs and by supporting students as they tutor and mentor young people from
underserved areas in the city, the BCC advocates for social
justice and equity on campus and in the larger community.
The BCC is located in the center of campus directly behind
Buttrick Hall and across from the main campus mailroom. For
more information, please call (615) 322-2524 or visit vanderbilt.
edu/bcc.
International Student and Scholar Services
International Student and Scholar Services (ISSS) fosters the
education and development of nonimmigrant students and
scholars to enable them to achieve their academic and professional goals and objectives. ISSS provides advice, counseling,
and advocacy regarding immigration, cross-cultural, and
personal matters. ISSS supports an environment conducive
to international education and intercultural awareness via
educational, social, and cross-cultural programs.

Immigration Support and Education
ISSS provides immigration advising and services, including the processing of immigration paperwork, to more than
1,952 international students and scholars. The office works
with admission units, schools, and departments to generate
documentation needed to bring nonimmigrant students and
scholars to the U.S. Further, ISSS keeps abreast of the regulations pertaining to international students and scholars in
accordance with the Departments of Homeland Security and
State. ISSS advising staff are available to support students’ and
scholars’ requests through email, phone calls, daily walk-in
hours (1:30–3:30 p.m., Monday–Friday), and private appointments. ISSS puts a strong emphasis on providing employment
workshops to inform international students about professional

26

development and employment options while enrolled and
after graduation. The office conducts Curricular Practical
Training (CPT) workshops every ten days, Optional Practical Training (OPT) workshops every ten days, and Academic
Training (AT) workshops every month. ISSS also supports
more than 300 alumni international students who have already
graduated and are either on OPT or AT work permission.

Sociocultural Adjustment Support
ISSS provides a range of programs and activities throughout
the year to address a variety of international student needs and
interests. ISSS coordinates semiannual orientation programs
for students and ongoing orientations for scholars, who arrive
throughout the year. The main orientation for students takes
place in the fall of each year and includes more than thirty
educational and social programs for newly arriving international students and free airport pickup. Incoming international
students are paired with current Vanderbilt students through
iLEAD, a mentorship program and student organization. The
main purpose of iLEAD is to create linkages between new students and the community and provide educational and social
programs to ease transition and increase success at Vanderbilt.
To help promote connection between international students and the greater Nashville community, ISSS coordinates
the First Friends program, which matches internationals with
domestic students, staff, and community members for friendship and cross-cultural exchange. The monthly World on
Wednesday presentations inform, broaden perspectives, and
facilitate cross-cultural understanding through discussions led
by students, faculty, and staff. International Education Week
in the fall provides the campus with additional opportunities
to learn about world cultures and to celebrate diversity.
Margaret Cuninggim Women’s Center
As part of the Office of the Dean of Students, the Margaret Cuninggim Women’s Center leads co-curricular campus initiatives
related to women’s and gender issues. The center partners with
many departments, programs, and individuals across campus
to raise awareness about the ways in which gender shapes and is
shaped by our lived experiences. Because its aim is to make the
Vanderbilt community more inclusive and equitable, the center
encourages all members of the Vanderbilt community to take
part in its events and resources.
The Women’s Center celebrates women and their accomplishments and fosters empowerment for people of all identities.
The center offers individual support and advocacy around a
variety of issues, including gender stereotyping, gender equity,
leadership, parenting, body image, disordered eating, pregnancy
and reproduction, sexual health, and more. The Women’s Center is open Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and
is located at 316 West Side Row. For more information, please
call (615) 322-4843 or visit vanderbilt.edu/womenscenter.
Office of LGBTQI Life
As a part of Vanderbilt’s Office of the Dean of Students, the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and Intersex (LGBTQI)
Life office is a welcoming space for individuals of all identities
and a resource for information and support about gender and
sexuality. LGBTQI Life serves the entire Vanderbilt community
through education, research, programming, support, and social
events. The office also serves as a comfortable study and socializing space, as well as a connection point to the greater Nashville

vanderbilt university

LGBTQI community. In addition, LGBTQI Life conducts
tailored trainings and consultations for the campus and community. The Office of LGBTQI Life is located in the K. C. Potter
Center, Euclid House, 312 West Side Row. For more information,
please visit vanderbilt.edu/lgbtqi.
Schulman Center for Jewish Life
The 10,000-square-foot Ben Schulman Center for Jewish
Life is the home of Vanderbilt Hillel. The goal of the center
is to provide a welcoming community for Jewish students at
Vanderbilt and to further religious learning, cultural awareness, and social engagement. Vanderbilt Hillel is committed
to enriching lives and enhancing Jewish identity. It provides
a home away from home, where Jews of all denominations
come together, united by a shared purpose. The Schulman
Center is also home to Grin’s Cafe, Nashville’s only kosher
and vegetarian restaurant. For further information about the
Schulman Center, please call (615) 322-8376 or email hillel@
vanderbilt.edu.
Office of the University Chaplain and Religious Life
The Office of the University Chaplain and Religious Life
provides opportunities to explore and practice religion, faith,
and spirituality and to more deeply understand one’s personal
values and social responsibility via educational programming,
encounters with various faith perspectives, and engagement
with religious and spiritual communities. The office welcomes
and serves all students, faculty, and staff and provides an intellectual home and ethical resource for anyone in the Vanderbilt
community seeking to clarify, explore, and deepen understanding of their lives and/or faith.
Recognizing the importance of exploring one’s faith in
community, the office facilitates opportunities for individuals
of a shared faith to worship/practice their particular religious
tradition. Whether guided by one of our affiliated chaplains
or a student-run religious organization, these groups foster
a sense of community and common values. For a complete
listing of campus religious groups, resources, services, and
programming opportunities, visit vanderbilt.edu/religiouslife.
Parking and Vehicle Registration
Parking space on campus is limited. Motor vehicles operated
on campus at any time by students, faculty, or staff must be
registered with Parking Services located at 28th Avenue South
in the 2800 Building. A fee is charged. Parking regulations are
published annually and are strictly enforced. More information is available at vanderbilt.edu/parking.
Freshmen may not purchase a parking permit or park on
campus at any time. Bicycles must be registered with Vanderbilt
University Public Safety.
Vanderbilt University Police Department
The Vanderbilt University Police Department, (615) 322-2745,
is a professional law enforcement agency dedicated to the protection and security of Vanderbilt University and its diverse
community (police.vanderbilt.edu).
The Vanderbilt University Police Department comes under
the charge of the Office of the Vice Chancellor for Administration. As one of Tennessee’s larger law enforcement agencies, the Vanderbilt University Police Department provides
comprehensive law enforcement and security services to all
components of Vanderbilt University including the academic
campus, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Vanderbilt

Undergraduate Catalog / Life at Vanderbilt

Health at One Hundred Oaks, and a variety of universityowned facilities throughout the Davidson County area.
The Police Department includes a staff of more than one
hundred people, organized into three divisions under the Office
of the Associate Vice Chancellor and Chief of Police: Operations Division (Main Campus, Medical Center, and 100 Oaks
Precincts), Administrative Division, and Auxiliary Services
Division. All of Vanderbilt’s commissioned police officers have
completed officer training at a state-certified police academy
and are required to complete on-the-job training as well as
attend annual in-service training. Vanderbilt police officers hold
Special Police Commissions and have the same authority as
that of a municipal law enforcement officer, while on property
owned by Vanderbilt, on adjacent public streets and sidewalks,
and in nearby neighborhoods. When a Vanderbilt student is
involved in an off-campus offense, police officers may assist
with the investigation in cooperation with local, state, or federal
law enforcement. The department also employs non-academytrained officers called community service officers (commonly
referred to as CSOs) who lend assistance 24/7 to the Vanderbilt
community through services that include providing walking
escorts, providing jump starts, and unlocking cars. For nonemergency assistance from a community service officer, dial
(615) 322-2745 (2-2745 from an on-campus extension).
The Vanderbilt University Police Department provides
several services and programs to members of the Vanderbilt
community:
Vandy Vans—The Vanderbilt University Police Department administers the Vandy Vans escort system at Vanderbilt
University. The Vandy Vans escort system provides vehicular
escorts to designated locations on campus. The service consists
of vans that operate from 5:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. GPS technology allows students to track Vandy Vans on their route via
computer or mobile phone, and to set up text message alerts to
let them know when a van will be arriving at their stop.
Stop locations were chosen based on location, the accessibility of a secure waiting area, and student input. Signs, freestanding or located on existing structures, identify each stop. A
walking escort can be requested to walk a student from his/her
stop to the final destination. A van is also accessible to students
with mobility impairments. For complete information about the
Vandy Vans service, including routes, stops, and times, please
visit vandyvans.com or call (615) 322-2554.
As a supplement to the Vandy Vans van service, walking
escorts are available for students walking to and from any location on campus during nighttime hours. Walking escorts are
provided by VUPD officers. The telephone number to call for a
walking escort is (615) 421-8888, or 1-8888 from a campus phone,
after which, a representative from VUPD will be dispatched to
the caller’s location, or to a designated meeting point to accompany the caller to his or her destination.
Emergency Phones—Emergency telephones (Blue Light
Phones) are located throughout the university campus, Medical
Center, and 100 Oaks.
Each phone has an emergency button that when pressed
automatically dials the VUPD Communications Center. An
open line on any emergency phone will activate a priority
response from an officer. An officer will be sent to check on
the user of the phone, even if nothing is communicated to the
dispatcher. Cooperation is essential to help us maintain the
integrity of the emergency phone system. These phones should
be used only for actual or perceived emergency situations.
An emergency response can also be activated by dialing 911
from any campus phone. Cellphone users can dial (615) 421-1911

27

to summon an emergency response on campus. Cellphone users
should dial 911 for off-campus emergencies. Callers should be
prepared to state the location from which they are calling.
Security Notices—In compliance with the U.S. Department of Higher Education and the Jeanne Clery Act, Security
Notices are issued to provide timely warning information concerning a potentially dangerous situation on or near Vanderbilt University. This information is provided to empower our
students and employees with the information necessary to
make decisions or take appropriate actions concerning their
own personal safety. Security Notices are distributed throughout Vanderbilt to make community members aware of significant crimes that occur at the university. They are distributed
through Vanderbilt email lists and through the department’s
webpage, police.vanderbilt.edu/crime-info/crime-alerts.
Educational and Assistance Programs—The Crime Prevention Unit of Vanderbilt University Police Department offers
programs addressing issues such as sexual assault, domestic violence, workplace violence, personal safety, RAD (Rape Aggression Defense) classes, and victim assistance. VUPD provides
additional services including property registration (for bikes,
laptops, etc.), lost and found, weapons safekeeping, and Submit
a Crime Tip. For further information on available programs and
services, call (615) 322-7846 or visit police.vanderbilt.edu.
Additional information on security measures and crime statistics for Vanderbilt is available from the Vanderbilt University
Police Department, 2800 Vanderbilt Place, Nashville, Tennessee
37212. Information is also available at police.vanderbilt.edu.
Annual Security Report—The Vanderbilt University Annual
Security Report is published each year to provide you with
information on security-related services offered by the university and campus crime statistics in compliance with the Jeanne
Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus
Crime Statistics Act and the Tennessee College and University
Security Information Act.
This booklet is prepared with information provided by the
Nashville Metropolitan Police Department, the Department of
Student Athletics, Office of the Dean of Students, the Office of
Housing and Residential Education, and the Vanderbilt University Police Department. It summarizes university programs,
policies, and procedures designed to enhance personal safety
for everyone at Vanderbilt.
A copy of this report may be obtained by writing or calling
the Vanderbilt University Police Department, 111 28th Avenue
South, Nashville, Tennessee 37212 or by telephone at (615) 8759157. A PDF copy of this report may also be obtained on the
website at police.vanderbilt.edu/crimeinfo.

Extracurricular Activities
Student Governance
Vanderbilt Student Government (VSG) works in partnership
with faculty and administration to represent student interests, concerns, and aspirations. In addition, the organization
sponsors and coordinates activities that promote student
involvement and interaction with faculty. Student interests
are addressed through the three branches of the organization: executive, legislative, and judicial. The executive branch
includes the executive board, cabinet, programming team, as
well as ad hoc and standing committees. The legislative branch
is made up of elected student officials representing the four
undergraduate schools and the residential areas. The judicial

28

branch enforces rules set forth in VSG-governing documents.
Students are encouraged to become involved with VSG in
either appointed or elected positions.
Active Citizenship and Service
Active citizenship and service are vital components of the
student experience at Vanderbilt. The Office of Active Citizenship and Service (OACS) aims to expose students to a wide
variety of perspectives and experiences aimed at educating the
whole person while cultivating lifelong learning. By creating applied community service programs that give students
the opportunity to engage, to question, and to create change
locally and globally, OACS helps students achieve personal
growth through meaningful, collaborative action. OACS supports, encourages, and advises Vanderbilt students and nearly
seventy student organizations to become involved in a wide
array of active citizenship and service opportunities. These
service opportunities explore topics such as health care, education, social enterprise, and community development.
OACS programming includes active community engagement in Nashville through a variety of service initiatives, including the 9/11 and Martin Luther King Jr. Weekends of Service.
The office coordinates global service-learning programs around
the world in Morocco, Ecuador, England, and South Africa, as
well as assisting student organizations with a variety of service
learning programs, both domestic and international.
OACS empowers students not only to build relationships
with other students and partners in the greater Nashville community, but also challenges students to seek new information
and to critically analyze the nuanced concepts of service and
advocacy. The OACS motto, Explore. Act. Reflect., celebrates
Vanderbilt’s mission of creative engagement, open inquiry,
equity, and compassion.
Student Centers
A variety of facilities, programs, and activities are provided
in five separate student center locations—Alumni Hall,
The Commons Center, Kissam Center, Sarratt Student
Center|Rand Hall, and the Student Life Center.
Sarratt Student Center|Rand Hall is the main student
center hub, housing a 300-seat cinema, art gallery, art studios,
multicultural space, rehearsal rooms, large lounge spaces, large
and small meeting spaces, and a courtyard. The facility is also
home to Vanderbilt Student Communications, radio station,
TV station, Last Drop Coffee Shop, and the Pub at Overcup
Oak restaurant. Rand Hall houses the Rand Dining Center,
campus store, student-operated businesses, the Anchor
(student organization space), a multipurpose venue, meeting
and seminar rooms, plus large, open lounge space. Some of
the offices located in Sarratt Student Center|Rand Hall include
the Dean of Students, Greek Life, Leadership, and the Office of
Active Citizenship and Service. Also included in this facility is
a United States Postal Service office.
The Vanderbilt Student Life Center is the university’s community keystone. It is both the fulfillment of students’ vision to
have a large social space on campus and a wonderful complement to Sarratt Student Center|Rand Hall. The Student Life
Center has more than 18,000 square feet of event and meeting
space, including the 9,000-square-foot Commodore Ballroom,
which is one of the most popular spaces to have events on campus. The center is also home to the Career Center, Commencement and Special Events, International Student and Scholar
Services, Global Education Office, and Global Support Services.

vanderbilt university

The Commons Center is the community crossroads of
The Ingram Commons living and learning community. It has
it all: the Dining Hall and great food; a living room with a
concert-grade grand piano, and the occasional live musical
performance; a small rec room with cardio equipment, free
weights, and weight machines; meeting and study rooms; and
academic support services like the Writing Studio, the Career
Center, and the CASPAR premajor advising center. The third
floor of The Commons Center is the home of the Department
of Political Science.
Alumni Hall was the original student center on campus
when the building opened in 1925. Re-opened in fall 2013 after a
yearlong renovation that transformed every space in the facility,
Alumni Hall has returned to its role as a student center after
serving other purposes over the years. In the newly renovated
Alumni Hall, students now have access to an exercise room as
well as several new meeting and event spaces and the Bamboo
Bistro. Two departments call Alumni Hall home, the Vanderbilt
Institute for Digital Learning and, most recently, the Vanderbilt
Graduate School.
Opened in fall 2014, Kissam Center is the fifth student center,
and is part of the new Warren College and Moore College residential living-learning communities. A completely new facility,
Kissam Center is home to more meeting and event spaces as well
as the Kissam Market and Kissam Kitchen.
Vanderbilt Student Communications, Inc. (VSC)
VSC has jurisdiction over campus radio stations, Vanderbilt
Television, and undergraduate publications that are supported
by the student activities fee. VSC functions chiefly to hire
student leaders, supervise and audit financial records, maintain professional standards, and develop communications
opportunities for students.
Among the divisions of the corporation are The Vanderbilt
Hustler, the campus newspaper; the Commodore yearbook;
radio stations WRVU and VandyRadio; Vanderbilt Television;
The Vanderbilt Review, an annual literary/arts publication; The
Slant, a humor/satire publication; My Commons Life, a website for first-year students; My Vanderbilt Life, a website for
all students; Vanderbilt Political Review; Vanderbilt Historical
Review; and Global VU, an international issues journal.
Recreation and Sports
Physical education is not required for graduate and professional
students, but almost two-thirds of Vanderbilt University students participate in club sports, intramurals, activity classes, or
other programs offered at the Vanderbilt Recreation and Wellness Center (VRWC). The large variety of programs available
for meeting students’ diverse interests include: thirty-two club
sports teams; forty intramural sports (softball, flag football, basketball, table tennis, and soccer); an aquatics program offering
swim lessons for all ages and abilities. Red Cross lifeguarding
and CPR classes are also available. If being outside is more your
style, you can choose from one of more than twenty adventure
trips offered each semester or create your own adventure trip
with tips and gear from the Outdoor Recreation staff. There are
more than eighty group fitness classes a week and a variety of
wellness offerings from “learn to box” to healthy eating through
Vandy Cooks in the demonstration kitchen, Personalized Nutrition Coaching, and Nutrition Minute grab-and-go information
on a variety of nutrition topics.
The VRWC is a 289,000-square-foot facility that houses
a 25-yard, 15-lane swimming pool; four courts for basketball,

Undergraduate Catalog / Life at Vanderbilt

volleyball, and badminton; five racquetball and two squash
courts; a four-lane bowling alley; five group fitness classrooms,
more than 14,000 square feet of weight/fitness room space;
rock-climbing wall; mat room; seven multipurpose rooms;
locker rooms; and a 120-yard turf field surrounded by a 300meter track in the indoor field house. VRWC’s exterior spaces
include a sand volleyball court and more than seven acres of
field space including three natural grass fields and one turf field.
All students pay a mandatory recreation fee which supports
the facilities, fields, and programs (see the chapter on Financial
Information). Spouses must also pay a fee to use the facilities.
For additional information, please visit vanderbilt.edu/
recreationandwellnesscenter.

Varsity Athletics
Students interested in more highly competitive sports on the
varsity level will find challenges in intercollegiate athletics sanctioned by the Southeastern Conference, the Big East Conference, Southland Conference, and the NCAA. Women’s teams
compete in basketball, bowling, cross country, golf, lacrosse,
soccer, swimming, tennis, and indoor and outdoor track and
field. Men’s teams compete in baseball, basketball, cross country,
football, golf, and tennis. Women’s lacrosse is in the Big East
Conference. Women’s bowling is in the Southland Conference.
All other sports are in the Southeastern Conference.
Cultural Activities on the Campus
Working through volunteer student committees that plan and
execute the programs, the Office of the Dean of Students sponsors twelve to fifteen dance, music, and theater events each
year, featuring renowned artists. Student committees select the
artists and handle all arrangements for the performances.
Vanderbilt’s cultural organizations annually produce
festivals that showcase traditional and modern dances, art,
music, and poetry to increase awareness of the many cultures
represented on campus. The events include Asian New Year
Festival by the Asian American Student Association, Diwali by
Masala-SACE, and Café Con Leche by the Vanderbilt Hispanic Student Association to name just a few.
The Office of Arts and Campus Events coordinates numerous campus galleries that regularly exhibit contemporary
artwork. The Sarratt Gallery, the student-run exhibition space
in the Sarratt Student Center, holds monthly art receptions
and gallery talks by visiting artists. Works from the university
collection as well as special curated exhibits are on display in
the gallery at the Bishop Joseph Johnson Black Cultural Center
and the Fine Arts Gallery in Cohen Memorial Hall.
Vanderbilt University Theatre annually presents four major
productions and several one-act plays for which all students
are invited to audition. Other campus groups and touring
companies also give dramatic presentations during the year.
The Vanderbilt Dance Program, housed in the dance studios
at Memorial Gym, offers noncredit classes at all levels in a wide
variety of dance styles, including ballet, modern, jazz, ballroom,
hip hop, and ethnic dance. Master classes are given on a regular
basis. The Vanderbilt Dance Program is home to five student
dance companies. Each year auditions are held for Vibe, the
student hip hop group; Vida, the student Latin dance company;
Momentum, the student-run dance group; and Vanderbilt
Dance Theatre, a company of students and community members. In addition, dance and drama auditions are held for the
student-run Rhythm & Roots Performance Company in the fall.
This group explores the use of performance art as an expression

29

of social complexities and as a catalyst for social change. The
student dance companies schedule performances throughout
the year, and the Vanderbilt Dance Program sponsors a concert
at the end of spring semester.
The Sarratt Art Studios host noncredit art classes in pottery,
photography, jewelry, drawing, painting, fiber arts, mosaics,
and stained glass. Classes and weekend workshops are taught
by Nashville professional artists. The studios are located on
campus in the Sarratt Student Center.
The Vanderbilt performing arts community represents more
than thirty student groups devoted to providing opportunities
for performers to showcase their talents. Student organizations
that schedule annual performances range from comedy groups
such as Tongue N’ Cheek to the hip hop–based Spoken Word
to the popular Juggling and Physical Arts Club to the musical theater of Vanderbilt Off-Broadway. Campus concerts are
presented each year by the Concert Choir and Chamber Singers;
Chamber Choir, Symphonic Choir, and Opera Theatre; Vanderbilt Orchestra and Chamber Orchestra; the Wind Ensemble and
Jazz Band; and numerous student a cappella groups.
Outstanding scholars and speakers visit the university
frequently, enriching the academic and cultural life of the
campus in many ways. Various academic departments sponsor
regular speaker programs, as do the student-initiated Impact
Symposium, the Speakers Committee, and the Gertrude
Vanderbilt and Harold S. Vanderbilt Visiting Writers program.
Inclusion Initiatives and Cultural Competence
The Office of Inclusion Initiatives and Cultural Competence
(IICC) is dedicated to the mission of promoting an environment of cultural competency, inclusivity, and awareness on
the Vanderbilt campus. This is accomplished through creating
intentional programming initiatives and training for students,
faculty, and staff that promote social justice, an ability to
instigate and participate in constructive conversations surrounding difference, and holistic identity development. IICC
provides structured support to our multicultural, international
student scholars, as well as students with disabilities, and fosters
intentional partnerships with relevant offices on campus. The
efforts of IICC are helping to move Vanderbilt forward as an
institution dedicated to all forms of racial, cultural, gender,
religious, and sexual identity expression and equipping our
students with the tools they need to effect change in an increasingly diverse world. For more information on the multicultural
student organizations, programs, and trainings offered by IICC,
visit vanderbilt.edu/iicc. IICC operates under the auspices of the
Dean of Students and is located in 337 Sarratt Student Center.
Office of Student Leadership Development
The Office of Student Leadership Development is designed to
serve as a conduit for leadership programming and a resource
hub for students, faculty, and staff. The office believes in
developing visionary, goal driven, and action oriented student
leaders. Students who participate in leadership programs will
be accountable to others, collaborative and team oriented,
effective communicators, and service-oriented; practice moral
decision making; and embrace diversity and inclusion.
The office sponsors signature leadership programs during
the year, but also works closely with all areas within the Dean
of Students office to ensure leadership programming occurs
across all aspects of campus life. Programs emerging from this
office will provide students with multiple points of entry and
easy access to develop and enhance their leadership skills.

30

vanderbilt university

Admission

T

HE admissions process for first-year applicants to
Vanderbilt is holistic in nature and based on students’
academic records and personal accomplishments. All
available information is considered, including secondary
school academic record, evidence of academic maturity and
independence, extracurricular activities, contributions to the
school and community, and scores on standardized tests.
The admission process is designed to select a diverse student
body with high standards of scholarship and personal character
with serious educational aims. Policies that govern the selection
process have been set by the dean of undergraduate admissions.
Please refer to the nondiscrimination statement on the inside
front cover.
Admission to the four undergraduate schools is managed by
the Office of Undergraduate Admissions. Prospective students
are encouraged to investigate the university by visiting the
campus, exploring the Office of Undergraduate Admissions
website, connecting via social media, and attending college fairs
and other programs hosted by Vanderbilt admissions officers
across the country and around the world. Admissions staff are
available to answer questions, arrange campus tours, provide
additional information about degree programs, and link visitors
with appropriate campus offices and members of the university
community.

Academic Preparation
A candidate for admission must present a transcript of work
from an accredited secondary school and the recommendation
of the guidance counselor or the head of school. The high school
record must show at least fifteen academic units of college preparatory work (a unit is a year’s study in one subject), with grades
indicating intellectual ability and promise. The pattern of courses
should show purpose and continuity and furnish a background
for the freshman curriculum offered at Vanderbilt.
Specific entrance requirements are as follows:
College of Arts and Science. At least 4 units of English, 2
units of algebra, 1 unit of plane geometry, 2 units of one foreign
language, 2 units of science, and 2 units of social science are
required. Additional units of mathematics, foreign language,
science, and social science are strongly recommended.
Applicants of ability and achievement who do not entirely
meet these requirements may request special consideration.
Students without the requisite units in English or mathematics
may be admitted on condition that they make up the missing
work prior to their first registration in the College of Arts and
Science. Students without the requisite two years in foreign
language must enroll during their first semester in a foreign
language course and must remain continuously enrolled until
they successfully complete a full year of one foreign language.
They must complete this requirement before the end of their
fourth semester in the College of Arts and Science.
Blair School of Music. At least 4 units of English, 2 units
of algebra, 1 unit of geometry, 1 unit of history, 2 units of a
foreign language, and 1 unit of science are required. Students
with fewer units may be offered admission but must complete
the missing work at Vanderbilt.
Audition/Portfolio. Applicants to the Blair School of Music
are required to audition on their primary instrument (or in
voice). Auditions will be held at the school on December 2, 2017;
January 26–27, 2018; February 16–17, 2018; and February 23–24,

2018. Students seeking admission to the composition degree
program must interview and present a portfolio of original
compositions. All students are required to submit prescreening
materials by January 1 (or November 1 for Early Decision). See
instructions for pre-screening on the Blair website. If applicants
pass the prescreening portion of the application, they will
receive a live audition or interview invitation; please see the
Blair website for instructions.
School of Engineering. At least 4 units of English, 2 units
of algebra, 1 unit of geometry, 1 unit of trigonometry, and 4
units of science, including physics, are required. Two units of
foreign language and 1 unit of history are also desirable.
Peabody College. It is strongly recommended that applicants have at least 4 units of English, 2 units of algebra, 1 unit
of geometry, 2 units of science, and 1 unit of history.
Application Procedure
1. Applicants may apply to Vanderbilt through the Coalition
for Access, Affordability, and Success; the Common Application; QuestBridge; or the Universal College Application.
Applications for admission are available online at coalitionforcollegeaccess.org, commonapp.org, questbridge.org, or
universalcollegeapp.com. Regular Decision applicants must
submit required parts of the application by January 1 for
consideration for admission for the following fall semester.
Applications for admission submitted after January 1 will
be considered, provided space is available. Admission
decisions will be available by April 1. Certain scholarships
require additional application materials and may have earlier deadlines. Interested students should visit vanderbilt.
edu/scholarships for more information.
2. Applicants must arrange for their high school to send an
official transcript of their record to the Office of Undergraduate Admissions.
3. Applicants are responsible for having their official scores
from the SAT and/or the ACT sent to Vanderbilt by the
testing agency. Score reports appearing on official high
school transcripts are acceptable for evaluation purposes,
but official score reports are required.
4. The $50 application fee is not refundable. A nonrefundable
matriculation deposit of $400 is required upon acceptance
of the offer of admission. This deposit is credited to the
student’s account, and the amount is deducted from the
bill for the first semester. Students with financial hardship
may request a waiver of these fees.
5. Blair School of Music applicants must also submit a
Blair School DecisionDesk Application, which includes
a required prescreening video, by the January 1 deadline.
Selected applicants will be invited to audition in person.
See the Blair website for information and instructions
about the Blair admissions process.
Early Decision Plans
These plans are designed to give an early admission decision
to well-qualified students whose first choice is Vanderbilt. In
order to apply under the Early Decision plans, the student
must complete the following steps:

Undergraduate Catalog / Admission

31

1. Complete all parts of the application for admission and
submit it with the appropriate Early Decision plan box
checked and the $50 nonrefundable application fee or fee
waiver for qualified students. November 1 is the deadline
for Early Decision I, and January 1 is the deadline for Early
Decision II.

program of admission without high school diploma is intended
to serve applicants of unusual promise who will benefit from
beginning their college career a year early. Application should
be made by January 1 of the junior year in high school. Additional examinations may be required. Other criteria will also be
considered, such as maturity and motivation.

2. Sign the Early Decision Agreement, stating that Vanderbilt
is your first choice, affirming your intention to enroll at
Vanderbilt if offered admission under the Early Decision plan, and agreeing to withdraw applications to other
colleges if admitted. Your parent and guidance counselor
must also sign this agreement.

A Note Regarding the Redesigned SAT
SAT scores mentioned in this catalog refer to tests administered in March 2016 and beyond. For information on
the redesigned SAT, please see admissions.vanderbilt.edu/
quickguide/#testing/.

3. Send an official high school transcript through the junior year
to the Office of Undergraduate Admissions, along with a list
of courses being taken and to be taken in the senior year.
4. Send Vanderbilt the official scores from the SAT and/or the
ACT. Scores appearing on official high school transcripts
are acceptable for evaluation purposes, but official score
reports are required.
5. Blair School of Music applicants must also submit a Blair
Application, which includes a required prescreening video,
by November 1 for Early Decision I or by January 1 for Early
Decision II. Selected applicants will be invited to audition or
interview in person. See the Blair website for information and
instructions about the Blair admissions process.
Applicants under the Early Decision plans may be admitted, denied admission, or deferred for later consideration in
competition with all applicants at the regular decision process. Applicants who are deferred are encouraged to submit
additional test scores, seventh semester grades, and any other
information that may be helpful.
Admission without Diploma
Certain students who are recommended by their high school
principals and are considered by the Office of Undergraduate Admissions to be ready for college work may be admitted
following completion of their junior year in high school. This
AP Exam

AP Score

Advanced Credit
Honors courses and other accelerated study in high school
are excellent preparation for Vanderbilt. The well-established
advanced-placement policy endeavors to recognize exceptional high school preparation, to avoid requiring freshmen to
take courses clearly mastered in high school, and to encourage students to begin their college learning experience at
the level most appropriate to their preparation. Advanced
placement may be granted on the basis of good performance
on the College Board Advanced Placement Examinations,
on International Baccalaureate tests, or, in some cases, on
placement tests given by Vanderbilt. Credit may also be
awarded for the British G.C.E. “A” level examinations, the
Advanced International Certificate of Education (AICE), the
Cambridge Pre-U diploma, and similar tests, such as the
French baccalauréat, the German abitur, or the Swiss maturité
examinations. To qualify for credit for the AICE examinations or individual A-level examinations, students must
have achieved an A*, A, or B thereon. More information on
international exam credit is available at registrar.vanderbilt.
edu/international-examinations.
Advanced Placement Credit Policy
Advanced Placement Examination grades accepted for
advanced placement with credit by the various departments at
Vanderbilt are listed below.

Vanderbilt Course or Credit Equivalent

Credit Hours

HART 1110: History of Western Art I
HART 1105: History of Western Art II
ARTS No Equivalent: Art Studio
ARTS No Equivalent: Art Studio
ARTS No Equivalent: Art Studio

3
3
3
3
3

5

CS 1101: Programming & Problem Solving

3

4 or 5
4 or 5

ECON 1010: Principles of Macroeconomics
ECON 1020: Principles of Microeconomics

3
3

ENGL 1300W: Intermediate Composition
ENGL 1220W: Drama: Forms and Techniques
ENGL 1230W: Literature and Analytical Thinking

3
3
3

PSCI 1101: Introduction to Comparative Politics
PSCI 1100: Introduction to American Government and Politics

3
3

Art
Art History
4
		
Studio Art: 2-D Design
4
Studio Art: 3-D Design
4
Studio Art: Drawing
4

or 5
or 5
or 5
or 5

Computer Science
Computer Science A

Economics
Macroeconomics
Microeconomics

English
English Language & Composition
4 or 5
4 or 5
English Literature & Composition
		

Government and Politics
Government & Politics: Comparative
Government & Politics: United States

4 or 5
4 or 5

32

vanderbilt university

History
European History
United States History

4 or 5
4 or 5

HIST No Equivalent: European History
HIST No Equivalent: U.S. History

3
3

World History

4 or 5

HIST No Equivalent: World History

3

CHIN 2201: Intermediate Chinese I
CHIN 2202: Intermediate Chinese II
FREN 2203: Contemporary Francophone Cultures
FREN 2501W: French Composition and Grammar
FREN 2203: Contemporary Francophone Cultures
FREN No Equivalent: French Literature
GER 2201: Intermediate German I
GER 2202: Intermediate German II
ITA 2203: Italian Journeys
ITA 2501W: Grammar and Composition
JAPN 2201: Intermediate Japanese I
JAPN 2202: Intermediate Japanese II
LAT 2202: Intermediate Latin: Poetry
SPAN 2203: Intermediate Spanish
SPAN 2203: Intermediate Spanish
SPAN 3302: Spanish for Oral Communication through
Cultural Topics

5
5
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
5
5
3
5
5

MATH
MATH
MATH
MATH
MATH

4
4
4
4
4

Human Geography			No Credit
Languages
Chinese Language and Culture
4
Chinese Language and Culture
5
4
French Language
		
French Literature
4
		
German Language
4
		
Italian Language and Culture
4
		
Japanese Language & Culture
4
5
Japanese Language & Culture
Latin
4
Spanish Language or Literature
4
5
Spanish Language or Literature
		
		

or 5
or 5
or 5
or 5

or 5

3

Mathematics
Calculus AB
5
Calculus BC & AB Subscore
3&5
Calculus BC & AB Subscore
4&5
Calculus BC
5
		

1300:
1300:
1300:
1300:
1301:

Accelerated
Accelerated
Accelerated
Accelerated
Accelerated

Single-Variable
Single-Variable
Single-Variable
Single-Variable
Single-Variable

Calculus
Calculus
Calculus
Calculus
Calculus

I
I
I
I
II

Music
Music Theory

5

MUTH 1200: Survey of Music Theory

3

5

PSY 1200: General Psychology

3

BSCI 1100: Biology Today
BSCI 1100L: Biology Today Laboratory
CHEM 1601: General Chemistry
CHEM 1601L: General Chemistry Laboratory
CHEM 1602: General Chemistry
CHEM 1602L: General Chemistry Laboratory
No Credit
PHYS 1010: Introductory Physics
PHYS 1010L: Introductory Physics Lab

3
1
3
1
3
1

No course credit awarded for music majors

Psychology
Psychology

Sciences
Biology
4 or 5
		
Chemistry
5
		
		
		
Environmental Science		
Physics 1
5
		

3
1

None of the credits awarded for Physics 1 shall count toward the major or the minor in physics. No credit awarded for engineering students.

Physics 2

5

PHYS No Equivalent

4

None of the credits awarded for Physics 2 shall count toward the major or the minor in physics. No credit awarded for engineering students.

Physics B
5
		

PHYS 1010: Introductory Physics
PHYS 1010L: Introductory Physics Laboratory

3
1

No credit awarded for engineering students; not to be awarded if student also has credit for Phys 1601/1601L or Phys 1602/1602L

Physics C: Electricity & Magnetism
5
		
Physics C: Mechanics
5
		

PHYS
PHYS
PHYS
PHYS

1602: General Physics II
1602L: General Physics Laboratory II
1601: General Physics I
1601L: General Physics Laboratory I

3
1
3
1

Statistics
Statistics
No credit awarded for engineering students

4 or 5

MATH 1010: Probability and Statistical Inference

3

Undergraduate Catalog / Admission

33

At the determination of individual departments, Advanced
Placement Examination grades with a score of 4 or 5 may be
accepted for credit. The amount of credit that may be awarded
corresponds to the course work waived. Advanced Placement
credit does not affect the Vanderbilt grade point average.
Students of the College of Arts and Science are limited
to a total of 18 credit hours earned by any combination of
advanced placement, international baccalaureate credit,
advanced international credit, and credit by departmental
examination, counting toward the minimum number of hours
required toward the degree. No form of advanced placement
credit can be used in fulfillment of the Achieving Excellence

IB Certificate Subject

IB Score

Biology (Higher)
6
		
Chemistry (Higher)
6
		
		
		
Economics (Higher)
6
		
English (Higher)
6
		
French (Higher)
6
		
History (Higher)
6
Japanese (Higher)
6
		
Latin (Higher)
6
		
6
Mathematics (Higher)
		
		

or 7
or 7

or 7
or 7
or 7
or 7
or 7
or 7
or 7

in Liberal Education (AXLE) requirements for students in the
College of Arts and Science.
International Baccalaureate Credit Policy
International Baccalaureate test scores accepted for advanced
credit by the various departments at Vanderbilt are listed
below. Students who have taken tests in other areas may submit their scores to the Office of Academic Services for evaluation by the appropriate departments. Credits are awarded for
exams taken at the higher level only. The amount of credit that
may be awarded is subject to the same limitations as credit for
Advanced Placement.

Vanderbilt Course or Credit Equivalent

Credit Hours

BSCI 1100: Biology Today
BSCI 1100L: Biology Today Laboratory
CHEM 1601: General Chemistry
CHEM 1601L: General Chemistry Laboratory
CHEM 1602: General Chemistry
CHEM 1602L: General Chemistry Laboratory
ECON 1010: Principles of Macroeconomics
ECON 1020: Principles of Microeconomics
ENGL 1220W: Drama: Forms and Techniques
ENGL 1230W: Literature and Analytical Thinking
FREN 2203: Contemporary Francophone Cultures
FREN No Equivalent: Elective Credit
HIST No Equivalent: History Elective
JAPN 3301: Advanced Japanese I
JAPN 3302: Advanced Japanese II
LAT 2201: Intermediate Latin: Prose
LAT 2202: Intermediate Latin: Poetry
MATH 1010: Probability and Statistical Inference
MATH 1300: Accelerated Single Variable Calculus I
MATH No Equivalent: Math elective credit

3
1
3
1
3
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
1

							

No credit for Math 1010 for engineering students.

Music (Higher)
6
Physics (Higher)
7
		
		
		
Psychology (Higher)
6
Russian (Higher)
6
		
Spanish (Higher)
6
		
		
Visual Arts (Higher)
6
		

MUSL No Equivalent (may count toward a music major)
PHYS 1601: General Physics I
PHYS 1601L: General Physics Laboratory I
PHYS 1602: General Physics II
PHYS 1602L: General Physics Laboratory II
PSY 1200: General Psychology
RUSS 2201: Second-Year Russian
RUSS 2202: Second-Year Russian
SPAN 2203: Intermediate Spanish
SPAN 3302: Spanish for Oral Communication through
Cultural Topics
ARTS No Equivalent: Visual Arts
ARTS No Equivalent: Visual Arts

or 7

or 7
or 7
or 7

or 7

3
3
1
3
1
3
3
3
5
3
3
3

34

Pre-College Summer School Program
Upon completion of the sophomore or junior year in high
school, students may enroll, at the freshman level, for regular
work in the Vanderbilt summer session.
The following conditions must be met: (a) students must
be in the upper 25 percent of their high school class and be
recommended by their principal or counselor; (b) courses
taken in the Vanderbilt summer session must be chosen by the
student in consultation with his or her high school counselor
and the director of the Division of Unclassified Studies so as
to supplement and not overlap the total high school program.
A student may take two courses in any one summer, or three
courses by special authorization of the director of the Division
of Unclassified Studies.
Course work done at Vanderbilt by a pre-college student
may count toward the high school diploma and as part of the
entrance requirements for regular admission to Vanderbilt.
All course work done at Vanderbilt by pre-college students will
be credited toward the degree for those who may subsequently
matriculate at Vanderbilt, unless the course work is required
for high school graduation. Admission to the pre-college
summer school program does not admit a student as a regular
entering freshman, nor does it commit the university to a
student’s admission.
Credit for Previous College Work
Entering first-year students who have taken college work
during their junior or senior year in high school through dual
enrollment or concurrent enrollment programs, or during
summers prior to their offer of admission to Vanderbilt, must
report such work to the Office of Undergraduate Admissions if they wish it to be reviewed for credit. At the student’s
request, the dean of the appropriate undergraduate school
will determine whether such work may be credited toward the
Vanderbilt degree. Vanderbilt credit will not be awarded for
college courses taken to meet the minimum entrance requirements of 15 high school units.
The question of credit at Vanderbilt must be settled in
advance of the student’s final registration.
Credit will be awarded only if:
1. A course is regularly offered by an accredited two-year
or four-year college or university;
2. The teacher was a regular faculty member of that college or university; and
3. A majority of the students in the course were candidates for a degree at that college or university.
The College of Arts and Science and Peabody College
usually do not award credit for work at other colleges in the
summer immediately preceding the student’s first semester at
Vanderbilt. Summer work elsewhere will be accepted for credit
only if an unusual educational opportunity can be demonstrated and if the courses sought are as rigorous as courses
offered at Vanderbilt. Approval for work to be taken elsewhere
must be obtained in advance from the appropriate dean.
College of Arts and Science. In no case may credits completed elsewhere after the student has been offered admission
by the College of Arts and Science satisfy AXLE requirements.

vanderbilt university

International Students
Vanderbilt has a large international community representing
more than 117 countries. The university welcomes the diversity
international students bring to the campus and encourages
academic and social interactions at all levels.
Admission. Students from other countries are required to
complete all the admission requirements of the university.
Applicants whose first language or language of instruction
is not English are required to submit the results of the Test
of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL), the International
English Language Testing Service (IELTS), or the Pearson Test
of English Academic (PTE Academic). This testing requirement may be waived if a student has scored above a 33 on the
SAT Reading Test (administered March 2016 and later), or
above a 26 on the ACT English section. Minimum recommended scores for Vanderbilt are 100 on the internet-based
TOEFL, 230 on the computer-based TOEFL, 7.0 on the IELTS,
and 70 on the PTE Academic.
English Language Instruction. Entering students may be
required to take language support courses concurrently with
their academic courses at the Vanderbilt English Language
Center (ELC).
For information about the English Language Center’s
programming, visit vanderbilt.edu/elc.
Financial Resources. To meet requirements for entry into
the United States for study, applicants must demonstrate that
they have sufficient financial resources to meet the expected
costs of their educational program. Applicants must provide
documentary evidence of their financial resources before visa
documents can be issued.
United States laws and regulations restrict the opportunity
for international students to be employed. Undergraduate international students are allowed to work on campus for nineteen
hours per week while school is in session. Students may be
allowed to work off campus only under special circumstances.
Many spouses and dependents of international students are not
allowed to be employed while in the United States.
Limited need-based financial aid is available to students
who are neither citizens nor permanent residents of the
United States. To apply for need-based financial aid, students
are required to submit the College Scholarship Service (CSS)
Financial Aid Profile. Admission for international students
is “need-aware”; the larger the amount of financial aid needed,
the greater the competition for admission.
Student Injury and Sickness Insurance. International students are automatically enrolled in the Vanderbilt University–
approved International Student Injury and Sickness Insurance
Plan. The student may waive this requirement if comparable
coverage is provided by an alternate insurance plan and will be
effective throughout the policy year. Information concerning
the limits, exclusions, and benefits of this insurance coverage
may be obtained from Student Health Services.
Information. Assistance in nonacademic matters before
and during the international student’s stay at Vanderbilt is
provided by Vanderbilt’s International Student and Scholar
Services. For more information, visit vanderbilt.edu/isss.

Undergraduate Catalog / Admission

Transfer Students
Admission of transfer students to Vanderbilt is competitive,
with the primary criterion being academic merit. The priority
deadline for transfer admission is March 15. It is our practice
to offer transfer admission for the fall semester only.
To be considered for transfer admission to Vanderbilt,
applicants must submit all required parts of either the Coalition
Application Transfer Application, the Common Application
Transfer Application, or the Universal College Application
Transfer Application and satisfy the following conditions:
1. Provide official test results from either the SAT and/or the
ACT;
2. Provide a Transfer College Report and be in good standing
at the institution last attended;
3. Provide an official secondary school transcript;
4. Provide official transcripts from each college attended;
5. Submit two academic letters of recommendation;
6. Agree to attend a Vanderbilt undergraduate program for
at least four semesters (at least 60 hours) of full-time work.
Two of these semesters (at least 30 hours) must be within
the senior year.
Work presented for transfer must be from an accredited
college and is subject to evaluation in light of the degree
requirements of this university.
Work transferred to Vanderbilt from another institution
will not carry with it a grade point average. No course in
which a grade below C– was received will be credited toward a
degree offered by the university.
College of Arts and Science. Transfer students must
complete at least 60 hours of work in the College of Arts and
Science. Credit earned as a degree-seeking student at another
university may be used to fulfill AXLE requirements.
Blair School of Music. In addition to an application for
admission, transfer students applying to Blair must also submit a Blair School DecisionDesk Application, which includes
a required prescreening video, by the March 15 deadline.
Selected applicants will be invited to audition in person. See
the Blair website for information and instructions about the
Blair admissions process. Transfer students will be assigned a
level of program study based on the entrance audition. Credit
for music courses may be granted following an examination
at Blair. Credit for non-music courses is subject to evaluation
by the College of Arts and Science. Transfer students must
complete at least 63 hours at Blair.
School of Engineering. Transfer students must complete at
least 60 hours of work in the School of Engineering.
Peabody College. Transfer students must complete at least
60 hours of work at Peabody. Two of the four semesters in
residence must be the last two semesters of the student’s
degree program.
Prior Degrees
It is the policy of Vanderbilt University to verify prior educational credentials for all admitted students who intend to
matriculate. All matriculated students must provide official
copies of transcripts and any other required supporting documentation to Vanderbilt University as part of the prior degree
verification process. The Office of the University Registrar
will review transcripts and other supporting documentation for authenticity and to confirm degrees earned prior to

35

matriculation at Vanderbilt. Offers of admission are contingent on a student’s providing the required documentation.
Students who are not able to provide evidence of prior degrees
will not be permitted to register for subsequent terms and may
be subject to dismissal from the university.
Intra-University Transfer
Undergraduate students in the College of Arts and Science, Blair
School of Music, School of Engineering, and Peabody College
may request a transfer between the schools. Students are eligible
for intra-university transfer after having been enrolled on a
full-time basis at Vanderbilt for two semesters. Students who
transferred to Vanderbilt from another institution are eligible
for intra-university transfer after having completed at least one
full semester at Vanderbilt and having achieved sophomore
standing. To be eligible for transfer, students must meet the
requirements of the school they wish to enter.
Applications are available on the University Registrar website, registrar.vanderbilt.edu/intra-university-transfers/, and
should be submitted to the Office of the University Registrar
by the required deadlines listed on this webpage.
Students seeking transfer between schools within the
university must meet the following requirements: (a) a student
who has been in residence for two regular semesters must
have a minimum of 24 hours and a cumulative grade point
average of 1.800; (b) a student who has been in residence for
three regular semesters must have a minimum of 39 hours and
a cumulative grade point average of 1.850; (c) a student who
has been in residence for four regular semesters must have a
minimum of 54 hours and a cumulative grade point average of
1.900; (d) a student who has been in residence for five regular
semesters must have a minimum of 69 hours and a cumulative
grade point average of 1.950.
Individual schools and/or majors may impose additional
restrictions beyond the minimum requirements listed above.
Students applying to the Blair School of Music must audition
as part of the process. Transfer applicants to the School of
Engineering should present at least two semesters of college
calculus, one semester of calculus-based physics, and (for
transfer to biomedical engineering or chemical engineering)
two semesters of college chemistry. Advanced Placement or
International Baccalaureate credit, if accepted by Vanderbilt,
can be used to meet these requirements.
Division of Unclassified Studies
The Division of Unclassified Studies provides an opportunity to
take undergraduate courses at Vanderbilt as follows: (a) adults
not interested in working toward a degree, (b) visiting students
working toward a degree at another institution (students in this
category may not remain enrolled in the division for more than
two regular semesters and one summer session), and (c) rising
junior and senior students in high school who have received
special permission to enroll in courses for college credit.
Such students register in the Division of Unclassified Studies.
Records are kept of their work, and a transcript may be made
available to them as it would be if they were regularly enrolled
at Vanderbilt. Work taken in the division may be transferred
to a degree-granting unit of the university provided it is work
that will count as part of the program of that unit. Work so
transferred may not amount to more than one-fourth of the
requirements for the Vanderbilt degree. Requests for transfer to
a Vanderbilt degree-granting school must be made to the Office

36

of Undergraduate Admissions. Division of Unclassified Studies
students are not eligible for intra-university transfer.
Students who want to enroll in the Division of Unclassified
Studies must apply and be admitted to the division at least
two weeks before the first day of classes for the term they wish
to attend. Requests for exceptions to the admission criteria
must be addressed in writing to the vice provost for university
enrollment affairs and dean of admissions and financial aid,
whose decision is final.
All university regulations, including the Honor System, apply
to students registered in the Division of Unclassified Studies.
Degree candidates have priority in enrollment at Vanderbilt, and students registering in the Division of Unclassified
Studies should be prepared for this contingency. DUS students
must meet all course prerequisites. Permission of the Office of
the Dean is required for enrollment in some courses. Tuition
is charged at the standard rate.
Division of Unclassified Studies students are not charged
student activity, recreation center, or health insurance fees,
and do not have access to recreation or student health services.
Those enrolled in the division as full-time students (particularly visiting students or others living in campus residence
halls) may petition to be allowed to purchase these services.
Summer Session
The ten-week summer session begins in early June and ends
early in August. In addition, some units of the university
offer an accelerated four-week Maymester. Vanderbilt offers
the summer program for regularly enrolled students at the
university, for part-time students, and for students enrolled
during the regular year in other colleges and universities (visiting students).
Summer courses are normally offered by the College of
Arts and Science, Blair School of Music, the School of Engineering, the Graduate School, the School of Nursing, and
Peabody College.
Some courses extend over the entire summer session
and complete the work of a full semester. Others are offered
in modular units of eight, six, five, or four weeks, for full
semester credit. Still other summer courses complete a full
semester’s work in the first five-week or second five-week half
of summer session, with classes meeting twice as many hours
per week. In full-year courses offered in summer, the work of
the first semester is covered in the first half-session, the work
of the second semester in the second half.
Classrooms, residence halls, libraries, and dining halls
are air conditioned. The Vanderbilt Recreation and Wellness
Center and other athletic facilities are open in the summer. Information about the summer session is available on
request from the Division of Unclassified Studies or from each
school’s Office of Academic Services. Students may also go to
vanderbilt.edu/summersessions for additional information.

vanderbilt university

Maymester
In the interval of several weeks between final examinations
in the spring semester and the beginning of summer session,
Vanderbilt offers educational travel opportunities and a variety
of “total immersion” courses that would be difficult to offer
during a regular semester.
Students are permitted to take no more than one course
during the Maymester. Housing and food services are available during the session. Visiting students are eligible for
Maymester courses.
Information about May courses on campus or abroad can
be found at vanderbilt.edu/summersessions.

Undergraduate Catalog / Financial Information

37

Financial Information

T

UITION for undergraduates for the 2017/2018 academic
year is $46,500 ($23,250 a semester). An equipment fee
of $800 is charged for students enrolled in the School
of Engineering (in addition, freshmen entering the School of
Engineering are required to own a laptop computer, with an
estimated cost of $1,500). A full-time undergraduate student
takes 12 to 18 hours. Students taking more than 18 hours per
semester are charged $1,937.50 per hour for each extra hour.
Students who, for approved reasons, enroll for fewer than 12
hours are charged $1,937.50 per hour, with a minimum tuition
charge of $1,937.50 per semester. The $400 deposited with
the Office of Undergraduate Admissions when the student is
accepted is applied to the bill for the first semester.
Rates for tuition and fees are set annually by the Board of
Trust and are subject to review and change without further
notice.
Estimate of Expenses
Basic expenses (excluding travel and personal expenses)
should be approximately $66,567 a year, itemized as follows:
Tuition (2017/2018)
Room and board (estimate)
Books and supplies (estimate)
Student activities and recreation fees (estimate)
Student health insurance

$46,500
15,584
1,370
1,164
1,949

Other Academic Fees
Application fee
$50
First-Year Experience fee (year)
765
Engineering equipment fee (year)
800
Late registration fee
30
Senior-in-absentia minimum semester tuition charge
(hourly rate)
1,937.50
Special examination fee
5
Credit by departmental examination fee
50
Transcript fee (one time only)
100
Self-service registration concludes on the sixth day of the
term.
Students who have not registered by the published dates
may be subject to late registration fees. Registration dates are
published in the Academic Calendars.
Payment of Tuition and Fees
Tuition, fees, and all other university charges incurred prior
to or at registration are due and payment must be received
by August 31 for the fall semester and January 2 for the spring
semester. If courses are added AFTER the initial billing
period, it is the student’s responsibility to contact the Office of
Student Accounts for due dates and amounts related to tuition
in order to avoid any holds and/or late payment penalties. All
other charges incurred after classes begin are due and payment
must be received in full by the last business day of the month
in which they are billed to the student. If payment is not made
within that time, Commodore Cash and Meal Money may not
be available and your classes may be canceled. Visit vanderbilt.
edu/stuaccts for payment options.

Students/Guarantors will be responsible for payment of all
costs, including reasonable attorney fees and collection agency
fees, incurred by the university in collecting monies owed to the
university. The university will assess a $25.00 fee for any check or
e-payment returned by the bank and reserves the right to invoke
the laws of the State of Tennessee governing bad check laws.
E-Billing and Access to a Student’s Vanderbilt
Account
Vanderbilt exclusively uses convenient and secure electronic
billing (e-bills) for student account charges. Students may need
to take action to enable parents, guardians, and other “invited
payers” to receive e-bill notices and access to the e-bill website.
Students may access their online invoices from their YES landing page at yes.vanderbilt.edu. Once they have signed in to YES,
they may view invoices under the Billing Portal link.
Students are responsible for granting access to parents,
guardians, or other payers who should receive email billing
notifications. To do this, students log in to YES and click the
“billing portal link.” On your CashNet Account page, click “Add
New” in the “Other Payers” section. Enter the information that
is requested, and click “OK.” (You must enter the “login name”
that your authorized payer will use as a username—the logon
and password will be sent to your authorized payer in an email.)
Tutorials are located online at vanderbilt.edu/stuaccts/ebill.html.
Any month in which there is activity on the student’s account,
an e-bill will be generated and an email notification sent to
the student’s Vanderbilt email address, as well as to the email
addresses of others they have invited. The email notification will
have the subject line “Your E-Bill Is Now Available for Viewing”
and will contain a link to the secure e-bill website.
Payments may be made electronically, or for those wishing
to mail a payment, a payment coupon can be printed. When
an electronic payment is made, a confirmation email will be
sent. It remains the responsibility of the student to ensure
that bills are paid on or before the due date.
The Office of Student Accounts can be contacted at (615)
322-6693, toll-free at (800) 288-1144, or via email at student.
accounts@vanderbilt.edu. For additional information, please
visit the Student Accounts website at vanderbilt.edu/stuaccts.
Refunds of Tuition and Housing Charges
University policy for the refund of tuition and housing charges
provides a percentage refund based on the time of withdrawal.
Students who withdraw officially or are dismissed from the
university for any reason may be entitled to a partial refund in
accordance with the established schedule below. Students who
register for more than 18 hours and later reduce their registration to 18 hours or fewer may be entitled to a partial refund of
the extra tuition for hours over 18 in accordance with the same
schedule. Fees are nonrefundable.
Tuition Refund Insurance is offered through the Office of
Student Accounts. This elective plan provides coverage for
tuition and housing in the event a student withdraws from
school due to medical reasons. Go to collegerefund.com for
more information or to apply online.

38

vanderbilt university

Fall 2017 Withdrawal/Refund Schedule
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10

August 23–August 30
August 31–September 6
September 7–September 13
September 14–September 20
September 21–September 27
September 28–October 4
October 5–October 11
October 12–October 18
October 19–October 25
October 26–November 1

100%
90%
85%
80%
75%
65%
60%
50%
45%
40%

Fall Break October 12–13
No refund after November 1, 2017

Spring 2018 Withdrawal/Refund Schedule
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10

January 8–January 15
January 16–January 22
January 23–January 29
January 30–February 5
February 6–February 12
February 13–February 19
February 20–February 26
February 27–March 14
March 15–March 21
March 22–March 23

100%
90%
85%
80%
75%
65%
60%
50%
45%
40%

Spring Break March 3–11
No refund after March 23, 2018
Payment Options
Direct Payment: Tuition, fees, and all other charges are
paid directly to the university. Payment for the fall semester is
due by August 31. Payment for the spring semester is due by
January 2. Students can pay online after viewing their e-bill at
vanderbilt.edu/stuaccts. There is no further action required for
this option.
Interest-Free Monthly Payment Plan: Students can spread
payment over five monthly installments for each semester (fall
and spring), interest free, by enrolling in the VANDYPlan,
currently administered by Higher One. The deadline to enroll
in the VANDYPlan is August 31 for the fall semester (payments
begin May 15) and January 31 for the spring semester (payments
begin October 15).
The current estimated charges for the 2017/2018 academic
year are available at vanderbilt.edu/stuaccts to assist students
in determining their annual expenses. For further information,
please contact the Office of Student Accounts at (615) 322-6693
or (800) 288-1144.
Late Payment of Fees
All charges not paid by the specified due dates will be assessed
a late payment fee of $1.50 on each $100 owed (minimum late
fee of $5).
Financial Clearance
Transcripts (official or unofficial) will not be released until
the account has been paid. Diplomas of graduating students
will not be released until all indebtedness to the university is
cleared.

Activities and Recreation Fees
and Identification Card
All degree-seeking undergraduate students pay activities and
recreation fees that entitle them to admission to certain athletic,
social, and cultural events and to subscription to certain campus
publications. Specific information on these fees is published
annually in the Student Handbook. The undergraduate student’s
identification card will admit students to university activities
and the Vanderbilt Recreation and Wellness Center. It is also
used as a library card and to stamp other documents. The card
should be carried at all times and be returned to the university if
the student withdraws for any reason.
The student activities fee and the student recreation fee will
be waived automatically for the fall and spring semesters if the
undergraduate student is a part-time student registered for
four or fewer credit hours. Part-time undergraduate students
wishing to use the Vanderbilt Recreation and Wellness Center
will be required to pay the recreation center membership fee
for access. For more information, please see vanderbilt.edu/
recreationandwellnesscenter.
Transcripts
Official academic transcripts are supplied by the University
Registrar on authorization from the student. Transcripts are not
released for students with financial or other university holds.
Fraternity and Sorority Membership
There is a financial commitment associated with joining a
fraternity or sorority. The costs go toward inter/national fees,
chapter operating expenses, and social functions. Financial
obligations differ for men and women and among individual
chapters. New members can expect to pay higher dues their
first semester. Dues for Interfraternity Council (IFC) men and
Panhellenic women range from $750 to $1,500 per semester.
Initiation fees for National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)
and Intercultural Greek Council (IGC) chapters range from
$500 to $1,500 and continuing dues range from $100 to $500
each year. Additional costs throughout the semester may be
for meal plans, conference attendance, philanthropic contributions, pictures, gifts, parties, T-shirts, etc. Chapter fees are
paid directly to the fraternity or sorority. There are payment
plans available to students, as well as scholarships within the
individual chapters. Many chapters participate in the Facility
Management Program, and members pay $322 each semester,
charged to their student account, for the maintenance and
upkeep of the chapter house. In addition, some fraternities
pay an additional renewal fee which is deposited into their
on-campus account to help pay down loans or create a savings
account for future projects on the house.

Need-Based Financial Aid
Vanderbilt is committed to accessibility and affordability for all
admitted and enrolled students. Grants, scholarships, and work
opportunities are available to eligible students who apply for
assistance and have demonstrated financial need. Beginning in
the fall of 2009, financial aid packages offered to incoming and
current undergraduate students no longer included need-based
loans. While continuing to meet the full demonstrated need of
all eligible students, this expanded aid initiative, Opportunity
Vanderbilt, announced in October 2008 provides increased
amounts of need-based grants and/or scholarships (gift assistance) to replace need-based loans that would have otherwise

Undergraduate Catalog / Financial Information

been offered to meet a student’s demonstrated financial need.
Demonstrated financial need is the difference between the
cost of attending Vanderbilt and the amount that students
and their families are expected to contribute toward that cost.
The amount of aid to fully meet each student’s demonstrated
financial need is determined annually on the basis of current
financial information required/provided on relevant application forms.
Application Procedure
Prospective students need to complete a Free Application
for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and a College Scholarship
Service PROFILE. The FAFSA may be completed online at
fafsa.ed.gov. Students may complete the CSS PROFILE online
at collegeboard.org. The student must submit the FAFSA and
PROFILE no later than February 1 of the senior year in high
school. Further information regarding the application process
is available from the Office of Student Financial Aid and
Scholarships at vanderbilt.edu/financialaid.
Students must reapply for financial aid each year by submitting a CSS PROFILE and the FAFSA by April 15 of each year.
Renewal applicants must be in good standing and making
satisfactory academic progress in order to continue receiving
federal and institutional student aid funds. Renewal of university need-based assistance requires a minimum cumulative GPA
of 2.0 for the sophomore, junior, and senior years. The priority
consideration date for filing renewal applications is April 15.
Financial Aid for Early Decision Applicants
Early Decision applicants seeking financial aid must complete
the FAFSA and College Scholarship Service PROFILE to be
considered for Vanderbilt need-based grant assistance. The
FAFSA may be completed online at fafsa.ed.gov. Students may
complete the CSS PROFILE online at collegeboard.org. Early
Decision I applicants should complete the CSS PROFILE no
later than November 7 of the senior year in high school. Early
Decision II applicants should complete the CSS PROFILE process no later than January 2 of the senior year in high school.
Students will receive an estimate of their eligibility for financial
aid with their offer of admission.
Federal Title IV Aid
Financial aid is available from several Federal Title IV student
financial aid programs. Any citizen or eligible non-citizen
of the United States who is accepted for admission and who
demonstrates financial need is eligible to participate. This aid
may be renewed annually by students who continue to qualify
on the basis of financial need, if they are in good academic
standing and are making satisfactory academic progress in
accordance with standards prescribed by the U.S. Department
of Education. (See Satisfactory Academic Progress.)
The FAFSA establishes eligibility for participation in
federal aid programs. The loan programs also require completion of loan applications and/or promissory notes. Applicants
should contact their state agencies for information regarding
state aid programs and application procedures.
Vanderbilt participates in the following federal student
financial aid programs:
Federal Pell Grant Program
Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant
Program (FSEOG)
Federal Work-Study Program (FWSP)
Federal Perkins Loan Program

39

Federal Direct Loan Program
Federal Direct Parent Loan for Undergraduate Students
(PLUS)
In addition to the federal student financial aid programs,
Vanderbilt administers a number of need-based institutional
scholarship, grant, and loan programs, some of which are
described briefly in the Scholarship section of this catalog.
University general sources of need-based assistance and loan
funds available to students in all schools are listed.
Satisfactory Academic Progress Standards for
Undergraduate Students
Academic progress for students receiving Vanderbilt University
(institutional) need-based and/or federal Title IV financial assistance will be reviewed at the end of each academic term. Students
must be meeting progress standards as defined by the Office of
Student Financial Aid and Scholarships. These standards may be
stricter than those defined in the academic standards applied by
each of the individual undergraduate schools.
Institutional need-based aid assistance, including
Vanderbilt need-based grants and scholarships, and federal
Title IV financial aid are awarded for the academic year as
determined by eligibility criteria for each financial aid program. Renewal and continuation of awards will be contingent
upon maintaining satisfactory academic progress (SAP). The
undergraduate requirements below are separate from the
Academic Eligibility Policy required of all undergraduate
students. Students must obtain a minimum grade point average outlined below. We realistically anticipate that the level of
academic performance for each student will be higher than the
minimum required cumulative GPA for renewal of Vanderbilt
and federal financial aid programs. Students must successfully complete at least 2/3 (67%) of all credit hours attempted
(Completed Hours / Attempted Hours = Completion Rate).
Students must also complete their degree requirements within
150% of the length of your academic program for Title IV
eligibility. For example: Arts and Science degrees require 120
completed credit hours, meaning the maximum timeframe is
180 attempted credit hours.
Satisfactory Academic Progress Standards
Grade Level

Cumulative GPA

Required earned
credit hours

Freshman

1.8

0–23

Sophomore

1.8

24

Junior: Peabody and
A&S

2.0

54

Junior: Blair and
Engineering

2.0

54

Senior: Peabody and
A&S

2.0

84

Senior: Blair and
Engineering

2.0

86

All recipients who enroll full-time are expected to earn a minimum of 12
credits per semester.
Note: A reported grade of I or M are calculated as a zero grade point. The
student is responsible for notifying the Office of Student Financial Aid if an
earned grade is later received.

40

vanderbilt university

Financial Aid Warning
For students who are making satisfactory progress, the award
commitment for the subsequent year will normally be made
for the entire academic year. For students who fail to complete
the required credit hours within the specified time frame
and/or who fail to maintain the minimum GPA, the student
will receive a warning and the financial aid commitment will
be made for one subsequent semester only. Further review will
be undertaken at the end of that semester. If the student fails
to complete the required credit hours and/or fails to maintain
the minimum GPA within the subsequent semester, institutional and/or federal financial aid will be suspended.

Appeal Procedures
Any student whose institutional and/or federal Title IV student
aid is suspended due to unsatisfactory academic progress may
submit an appeal for reinstatement of such assistance to the
Office of Student Financial Aid and Scholarships. The appeal
for reinstatement should include the following elements:
•

An explanation of extenuating circumstances, such as
injury, illness, death of a relative, or other special circumstance as to why you failed to meet satisfactory academic
progress requirements.

•

An explanation of what has changed that will now allow
you to demonstrate satisfactory academic progress at the
end of the next semester.

•

Supporting documentation from medical doctors, advisers,
psychologists, etc., to verify the information you are including in your personal statement. Failure to provide information may result in your appeal being denied.

The student will be notified of the appeal approval or denial
and if eligibility for institutional and/or federal financial
aid funds will be reinstated for one additional semester on a
probationary basis.

Financial Aid Probation
At the end of a probationary semester, students must then
meet Satisfactory Academic Progress for continued eligibility of financial assistance. If a student fails to meet Satisfactory Academic Progress all institutional and/or federal Title
IV financial aid will be suspended. A student may make a
subsequent appeal for continuation of such assistance to the
Office of Student Financial Aid and Scholarships. A student’s
submitted appeal after a Probation status will be reviewed by
an Institutional Appeal Committee. If it is determined that the
student’s failure to meet academic progress was the result of
illness, death in the family, or other exceptional or mitigating
circumstances, those factors will be considered in determining whether or not eligibility for federal and/or institutional
student aid funds can be reinstated for one or more semester(s)
while following a prescribed Academic Plan as defined by the
Institutional Appeal Committee.

Academic Plan
Students must meet the standards set forth in an Academic
Plan that has been established to ensure that satisfactory academic progress will be met by a specific point in time in order
to continue receiving institutional and/or federal Title IV
financial assistance. Students who fail to earn the minimum

credit hours and GPA specified in their established Academic
Plan will have all financial assistance suspended until the
academic deficiency is corrected.

Reinstatement of Institutional and/or Federal Title IV
Assistance
If students fail to progress as outlined above, they will not be
eligible to receive further aid and will be notified that they may
appeal for reinstatement of institutional and/or federal aid
funds in any following/subsequent semester after the number
of required credit hours to advance to the next higher level
is achieved and/or their overall GPA has been raised to the
minimum level. It will be the responsibility of the student to
contact the Office of Student Financial Aid and Scholarships
to request the reinstatement of his/her institutional and/or
federal assistance.

Maximum Aid Eligibility
Vanderbilt University (institutional) need-based assistance:
A maximum time frame of four years (eight semesters or its
equivalent) of full-time enrollment is established for attainment of their baccalaureate degree when determining eligibility for the receipt of institutional financial aid. Terms enrolled
and credits earned at prior colleges/universities and accepted
toward the student’s undergraduate degree may be counted
toward the maximum time frame for Vanderbilt financial
assistance.
Federal Title IV assistance: A maximum time frame of 150%
of the required credit hours to receive a degree or six years
(twelve semesters or its equivalent) of full-time enrollment is
established for attainment of the baccalaureate degree when
determining eligibility for the receipt of funds through federal
Title IV student financial aid programs.
Student Employment
A primary source of information for students interested in
part-time on- or off-campus employment is through access to
an online job bank, HireADore.com. Many university, medical
center, and off-campus employers post their open positions on
HireADore.com at appropriate times throughout the year. The
Federal Work Study (FWS) Program is a Federal Title IV program and eligibility for it is determined upon completion of the
Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and other
required application materials. Vanderbilt has positions available, on a limited basis, for both FWS and non-FWS eligible
students. All students hired into on-campus positions will need
to complete the federally required I-9 work authorization paperwork/process. The student employment function is coordinated
out of the Office of Student Financial Aid and Scholarships
located on campus at 2309 West End Avenue. More information may be found at vanderbilt.edu/studentemployment or by
calling (615) 343-4562.

Undergraduate Catalog / Financial Information

University General Medals, Prizes, and
Awards
Also see the Honors chapters in the College of Arts and
Science, Blair School of Music, School of Engineering, and
Peabody College sections of this catalog for listings of additional awards and prizes.
THE JESSICA ACESTE AND ELIZABETH BEALE RIPPLE IN THE POND
AWARD was established in 2001 by Mr. and Mrs. George G. Strong
through the Strong Family Foundation to reward an undergraduate student in any area of the university for random acts of kindness. The award
was created to express the extreme gratitude of Mr. and Mrs. Strong in
recognition of the assistance and care that their daughter, Meredith, received from her friends and the Vanderbilt community as she was stricken
with meningococcal meningitis. Physicians credit the quick action taken
by Meredith’s classmates and Vanderbilt personnel with saving her life.
THE CHARLES FORREST ALEXANDER PRIZE IN JOURNALISM was endowed in 1982 by friends of Mr. Charles Forrest Alexander, B.A. 1950, who
died in 1976. As a student, he was editor of the Commodore, V Book, and
a staff member of the Hustler. The fund provides support for an annual
prize to be awarded to a student who has achieved distinction in journalistic
projects at Vanderbilt University.
THE GREG A. ANDREWS CIVIL ENGINEERING MEMORIAL AWARD was
established in 1969 by James M. Andrews, Sr. to support a senior in
civil engineering who, as judged by the faculty, has made the greatest
progress in professional development and who plans to pursue graduate
study in environmental and water resources engineering at the School of
Engineering. Donor established the fund to honor the memory of his son,
Greg, a junior at Vanderbilt who was fatally injured in an auto accident.
The Thomas G. Arnold Fund was established in 1988 by multiple
donors to provide an award for the best research/design project completed by a senior student in the Biomedical Engineering Department at
the School of Engineering.
THE DAN BARGE JR. AWARD IN CIVIL ENGINEERING was established
in 2011 by multiple donors as an award to give to a junior civil engineering
student who exhibits outstanding academic performance and dedication
to professional or community service at the School of Engineering. This
fund was established to honor the legacy of Daniel B. Barge Jr., B.E. 1943,
who was named a Distinguished Alumnus by the School of Engineering
in 1981. Dan served his school in numerous capacities, both formal and
informal: as an advisor, an employer of graduates, a donor, volunteer solicitor, and most importantly, as a role model for students. For many years,
thanks to Dan’s efforts, the school has presented an annual American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Award, given in recent years as the ASCE/
Dan Barge Award, to honor Dan’s professional accomplishments and
contributions to ASCE that culminated in his 1987 presidency.
THE MORRIS H. BERNSTEIN JR. PRIZE IN LATIN DECLAMATION was
endowed in 1983 by Mr. William H. Bernstein, B.A. 1983, open to any undergraduate student who has completed at least two semesters of Latin
at Vanderbilt University. Contestants shall deliver from memory selected
Latin prose or poetry passages which reflect the classical ideal. The fund
is named for Mr. Bernstein’s father, Dr. Morris H. Bernstein, Jr., B.A. 1943,
M.D. 1946.
The Blair Student Service Award fund established in 2009 by an
anonymous donor to provide an annual award for the Blair student who best
exemplifies the spirit and tradition of volunteer service through music at the
Blair School of Music.
THE GLENN AND ELIZABETH BOGITSH AWARD was established in
1989 by Burton J. Bogitsh, professor of biology, and Mr. and Mrs. James
T. Norris, Jr., to provide an annual award to the student at Vanderbilt
University who has best demonstrated a strong commitment to campus
recreational programs and, by example and leadership, has inspired participation and sportsmanlike conduct in these activities. The award recognizes physical fitness, participation in recreational sports, and sportsman-

41
ship and was established to honor the memory of the Donors’ son, Glen,
and daughter, Libby, both Vanderbilt graduates who died in a 1988 plane
crash. The award recipient will be given a small prize and will have his or
her name engraved on a plaque, which describes the award and lists annual winners, to be mounted on a wall of the Student Recreation Center.
The Casey Carter Bonar Leadership Award was established in
2011 by multiple donors to provide awards to undergraduate students in
their senior year based on leadership, broad collaboration, enthusiasm,
passion for campus involvement, selfless service to Vanderbilt, and dedication to positive change at Vanderbilt University. This fund was established
to honor the memory of Casey Carter Bonar, B.A. 1985, a dedicated and
selfless leader who inspired excellence and propelled others to join in her
commitment to serve. Casey’s vitality, warmth, compassion, and boundless enthusiasm served to energize and enhance each of the many campus
activities in which she was involved, including student government, student
media, Greek life, and Impact. Her passion for facilitating friendship and
camaraderie for higher purpose, for promoting service to all and helping expand the horizons of the “underdog,” earned her the lifelong gratitude and
admiration of her Vanderbilt community. An active member of the Alumni
Association Board, she often interviewed prospective students and organized alumni activities. Casey was proud of her Vanderbilt education. She
exemplified Cornelius Vanderbilt’s vision of strengthening the ties that bind
as she consistently reached out to make someone’s life better.
The Margaret Branscomb Prize was established in 1993 to
support an undergraduate prize at the Blair School of Music. The wife
of Vanderbilt’s fourth Chancellor, Harvie Branscomb (1946–1963), Mrs.
Branscomb served as president of the Vanderbilt Garden Club from 1952
to 1954. Historically, the prize is given annually to a Blair freshman judged
by the faculty to have the musical and personal qualities that best exemplify the spirit and standards of the school.
The Sue Brewer Fund Scholarship was established in 1987 by the
Songwriters Guild Foundation to provide support to either composition or
guitar majors at the Blair School of Music. To qualify, an entering freshman
must be ranked in the upper 25th percentile of his or her class, and an
upperclassman must have maintained at least a 3.0 GPA in the performance area, a 2.5 GPA in music, and a 2.0 overall GPA. This fund was
established in memory of Sue Brewer, who befriended many of Nashville’s
struggling songwriters in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
The Franklin Brooks Memorial Award was established in 1995
by multiple donors to defray travel costs for students studying in France
through the Vanderbilt in France program at the College of Arts and Science. This fund was established in memory of H. Franklin Brooks, former
associate professor of French and three-time director of the Vanderbilt in
France program during his 25-year teaching career at Vanderbilt.
THE LARRY ROSS CATHEY AWARD was established in 1974 by Arnold M.
Heiser to support an award that will recognize the most outstanding student
majoring in astronomy in the Astronomy Department at the College of Arts
and Science. This award was established in 1974 in memory of Larry Ross
Cathey, who graduated in 1966 with honors in physics and astronomy.
THE NORA C. CHAFFIN SCHOLARSHIP was established 1956 by the
Women’s Council of the Women’s Student Government Association to
provide scholarship support for deserving undergraduate students at
Vanderbilt University. This fund was established in honor of Nora C. Chaffin, former Dean of Women known for her service and loyalty to Vanderbilt
University and its women students. The scholarship is awarded to a junior
student who has displayed service to the University in the area of student
government, religious, literary and scholastic activities, and in the arts.
THE CLASSICS DEPARTMENT STUDENT TRAVEL FUND FOR ROME,
ITALY was established in 2006 by Richard H. Davis, B.E. 1969, and Barbara C. Davis, B.S.N. 1969, to support undergraduate student travel expenses in Rome, Italy, through the Classics Department at the College of
Arts and Science.
THE PAUL CONKIN FUND was established in 1999 by an anonymous donor to establish a prize for the best undergraduate term paper written on
American History in the History Department at the College of Arts and Science. Paul Conkin, Distinguished Professor of History Emeritus at Vanderbilt

42
University, is the author of the history of Vanderbilt University, Gone with the
Ivy, and the Peabody College History which was published in 2002.
THE COOLEY PRIZE was established in 1920 to provide recognition
for students who excel in fine arts at the College of Arts and Science.
The prize is named after Comrade Theodore Cooley, known as one of
the most public-spirited citizens of Nashville. Cooley was a successful
Nashville businessman and supporter of the Tennessee Centennial and
International Exposition held in Nashville in 1897 at the current location of
Centennial Park on West End Avenue.
The Walter Criley Prize Paper Award was established in 1978 by
Robert Derrick, B.E. 1954, and the Simons-Eastern Company to be given
for the best paper on an advanced senior project in electrical engineering at the School of Engineering at Vanderbilt University. This award was
created in honor of Walter Criley, professor emeritus of electrical engineering, who taught from 1947 until his retirement in 1965. Professor Criley
helped organize both the student chapter and the Nashville section of the
Institute of Electrical Engineers, and also served as southeastern regional
vice-president of the National Institute of Electrical Engineers. He passed
away in 1977.
The Donald Davie Memorial Poetry Prize was established in 2005
by multiple donors to support an annual prize to be awarded each spring to
the best poem submitted by a current graduate student in the Department
of English at the College of Arts and Science.
THE EDWARD PRENTICE DAVIS MEMORIAL PRIZE was established in
1997 by classmates of Mr. Edward ‘Ward’ Prentice Davis, B.A. 1987, to
provide support for an annual prize awarded to a deserving NROTC college program midshipman. Ward was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the United States Marine Corps and served honorably for three
years as an artillery officer. To his Marine Corps peers, Ward was an inspiration because he pursued his commission as a college program midshipman, without any scholarship. Ward passed away in 1995. This fund was
established to honor Ward’s commitment and perseverance.
THE ALLAN P. DELOACH MEMORIAL PRIZE IN PHOTOGRAPHY was
established in 1998 by Mr. Rusty Edmister and Mrs. Pat Adams to support
a prize in photography in the Fine Arts Department at the College of Arts
and Science. This fund was established in memory of Mr. Edmister’s and
Mrs. Adam’s former co-worker at IBM and Vanderbilt University alumnus,
Allan P. DeLoach, B.A. 1963. The award is open to any student who has
taken a studio class of any discipline. Students will submit one to three
photographs to be judged by a professional photographer, outside of the
Vanderbilt community, who will pick the winner and give a slide lecture to
students on his/her work.
THE ROBERT V. DILTS AWARD was established in 1994 by multiple donors to provide an award to a deserving undergraduate chemistry student
in the Department of Chemistry at the College of Arts and Science. This
award was established to honor Professor Robert V. Dilts, who served on
the chemistry faculty from 1960 to 1994.
THE ARTHUR J. DYER JR. MEMORIAL PRIZE was established in 1938
by Arthur J. Dyer, Sr. to award a medal to the Civil Engineering student in
his/her senior year who shows the greatest proficiency in the study and/
or design in the use of structural steel at the School of Engineering, and
who is a student member of the American Society of Civil Engineers. This
fund was established in memory of a former Vanderbilt student, Arthur
James Dyer, Jr., who was injured while prosecuting engineering duties on
a bridge at Panama City, Florida, and died September 2, 1928.
The David Ella Award was established in 2002 by Mrs. Jean M. Ella
to provide a $300 annual award to a varsity women’s soccer player in the
Department of Student Athletics.
THE T. ALDRICH FINEGAN AWARD FOR EXCELLENCE IN UNDERGRADUATE ECONOMIC RESEARCH was established in 2005 by T. Aldrich
Finegan, Professor Emeritus, to recognize excellence in undergraduate
research conducted by a senior graduating from the economics honors
program. The award should be given for an outstanding thesis written by
a student in the Department of Economics Honors Program at the College
of Arts and Science.

vanderbilt university
THE EDWIN S. GARDNER MEMORIAL PRIZE FOR EXCELLENCE IN
FRENCH was established in 1980 by Grace D. Gardner, B.A. 1932, to
be used, at the discretion of the Department of French at the College of
Arts and Science, in one of two ways: 1) to fund an annual award to a
graduating senior excelling in French studies, or 2) to purchase books for
the French collection in Jean and Alexander Heard Library. Donor made
this gift in honor of her late husband, Edwin S. Gardner, B.A. 1927, who
served as treasurer of Vanderbilt from 1953 to 1971.
The General Motors Political Science Fund was established to
support undergraduate prizes for political science students at the College
of Arts and Science.
THE GEYER AWARD was established in 1979 by Mr. Richard A. Geyer Jr.
to support a competitive journalism award designed to give recognition to
campus reporters “who consistently write articles resulting from thorough
research” and whose articles are, at the same time, “lively, informative,
and logical” in any area of Vanderbilt University.
THE GUY GOFFE MEANS AWARD was established in 1975 through the
bequest of Marie Hochle Means to provide an award to a student with ability in creative writing in the Department of English at the College of Arts and
Science.
THE NORMAN L. AND ROSELEA J. GOLDBERG PRIZE was established
in 1988 by Roselea J. Goldberg to support an annual award for the best
manuscript submitted each year to Vanderbilt University, preferably in the
area of art and medicine. The manuscript will be judged by a committee
from Vanderbilt University Press.
THE JOHN P. GREER AWARD was established in 2006 by Professor John
and Mrs. Shirley Lachs to provide an award to graduating seniors majoring in philosophy and going to medical school. Donors established this
award in honor of Dr. John P. Greer, Professor of Medicine in Vanderbilt’s
Department of Hematology, to commend his career path and in gratitude
of the care given by Dr. Greer to Mrs. Lachs.
THE LARRY C. HALL STUDENT TRAVEL FUND was established in 1995
by multiple donors to support a student traveling to the Pittcon Conference, a chemistry related conference, through the College of Arts and
Science. The fund was established in honor of Dr. Larry Hall at the time
of his retirement.
THE MARGARET STONEWALL WOOLDRIDGE HAMBLET FELLOWSHIP
was established in 1985 by Clement H. Hamblet and Margaret Hamblet
Sarner at the College of Arts and Science. The fellowship was established
in memory of Margaret Hamblet’s love of art and travels to Europe to
study art. Margaret Hamblet was a graduate of Peabody College in the
Class of 1926. Clement and Margaret Hamblet met in Paris where Margaret was an art student. The fellowship is awarded to a deserving senior
with outstanding merit in art and completion of three or more studio art
courses and provides one year of travel and furtherance of creative endeavor following graduation from the College of Arts and Science. The
second priority for the fund is to provide a continued small subsidy for a
second graduating senior.
The Andrew Sang Han Memorial Award was established in 2017
to support an award for a woodwind or brass student at the Blair School
of Music who demonstrates remarkable musicianship and leadership in all
areas of ensemble playing.
THE JEAN AND ALEXANDER HEARD AWARD was established in 2013 by
the children of Jean and Alexander Heard to provide need-based financial
assistance to deserving undergraduate students who have been accepted
to one of the summer music festivals through a summer study program at
the Blair School of Music. This fund was established in memory of Jean and
Alexander Heard. Chancellor Alexander Heard served as Vanderbilt University’s fifth Chancellor from 1963 to 1982 and oversaw many changes in the
campus. Under his tenure, Peabody College, Blair School of Music, and
Owen School of Management became part of the University.
THE JEAN KELLER HEARD PRIZE was established in 1985 by the
Vanderbilt Woman’s Club to provide an award for excellence in music
performance to a string student seeking a Bachelor of Music degree at

Undergraduate Catalog / Financial Information
the Blair School of Music. This fund was established to honor violinist Jean
Keller Heard, the wife of Vanderbilt’s former Chancellor Alexander Heard.
Mrs. Heard passed away in 2011.
THE HISTORY DEPARTMENT FRESHMAN SEMINAR AWARD was established in 2001 by Professor Sam McSeveney to award an annual prize to the
student who has completed the best freshman paper in a history freshman
seminar at the College of Arts and Science. Upon Professor McSeveney’s
death, he wishes for the award to bear his name.
THE FRANK HOUSTON AWARD FOR ORATORY was established in 1974
by Mr. Frank K. Houston, B.A. 1904, and former member of the Vanderbilt
Board of Trust, to support an annual prize given to a student who excels in
a presentation in public speaking in any department at Vanderbilt University.
Mr. Houston grew up in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, and took public speaking while he was a student at Vanderbilt. He established this competition to
encourage competent public speaking, as he believed that his experience
at Vanderbilt had made a very real difference in his own life.
THE MELVIN D. JOESTEN SCIENCE VOLUNTEER AWARD FUND was
established in 1998 by multiple donors to provide an award for outstanding science student volunteers in the Chemistry Department at the College
of Arts and Science. This endowed fund was established in the name of
Melvin “Mel” D. Joesten in recognition of his many years of service to the
department and to Vanderbilt University.
THE MARK M. JONES UNDERGRADUATE AWARD IN INORGANIC
CHEMISTRY was established in 1998 by colleagues and other friends
of Professor Jones to recognize undergraduates who have excelled in
inorganic chemistry at the College of Arts and Science. Preference will
be given to students showing excellence in undergraduate research. Dr.
Jones taught chemistry from 1957 until his retirement in 1998 and chaired
the chemistry department from 1970 until 1976.
THE MICHAEL B. KEEGAN TRAVELING FELLOWSHIP was established in
2004 by Michael B. Keegan and others to provide one or more graduating
undergraduate student(s) with an opportunity to study and travel abroad
in pursuit of an issue or topic of personal and intellectual passion. The Fellowship will provide a minimum of one annual award, each in the amount of
not less than $10,000 to help pay for travel expenses for the recipient(s), allowing the recipient(s) to study and possibly work outside the United States
of America for approximately one year. The fund was established as an
international fellowship to foster in the student(s) a sense of his/her potential as a citizen of the world, and as a traveling fellowship to create a deep
cross-cultural experience.
THE W. G. KIRKPATRICK PRIZE was established in 1926 through a bequest from Walter Gill Kirkpatrick, B.E. 1887, B.S. and M.S. 1889, to provide support for an annual prize for the most deserving third-year student
in the Department of Civil Engineering at the School of Engineering.
The Magda Lachs Award was established in 2008 by Brenda Higgins,
Vanderbilt employee in Blair Development and Alumni Relations, to support
a voice or orchestra student who participates in the opera presentation in
the school year in which the award is given at the Blair School of Music.
THE C. MAXWELL LANCASTER MEDAL FOR EXCELLENCE IN ITALIAN
was established in 1990 by Professor Luigi Monga to honor the memory
of C. Maxwell Lancaster, Professor of French and Italian at Vanderbilt University from 1939 until his retirement in 1976, and to promote the study
of the Italian language and literature at Vanderbilt University. The annual
prize will consist of a medal which will be awarded on recommendation
by the faculty of the Department of French and Italian to a fourth-semester
student for excellence in Italian.
THE R. J. LARSEN PRIZE FOR EXCELLENCE IN MATHEMATICS was
established in 2005 by multiple donors to provide an award to a graduating senior for excellence in mathematics at the College of Arts and Science. This fund was established in honor of Professor Richard Larsen to
celebrate his retirement. Professor Larsen worked in the Department of
Mathematics at the College of Arts and Science for over thirty years.
THE JOEL CARL LICHTER MEMORIAL AWARD was established in 1996
by Professor and Mrs. Barry D. Lichter to provide an award that will be

43
presented each year at the Magnolia Awards ceremony to a graduating
senior who contributes by example to the promotion of outdoor education,
combining academic excellence and expertise in wilderness skills along
with friendship and service to others in any area of Vanderbilt University.
Professor and Mrs. Lichter established the award to honor the life of their
son Joel Lichter, an avid outdoorsman who graduated from Vanderbilt
University magna cum laude in 1981 with honors in chemical engineering.
Joel Lichter died in a 1992 accident in Alaska while commercial fishing.
THE LEE J. LOVENTHAL PRIZE was established in 1937 by Mr. Lee Jefferson Loventhal, class of 1896 and member of the Vanderbilt University
Board of Trust from 1919 to 1940, to establish a prize in the Department
of Communication Studies.
THE S. S. AND I. M. F. MARSDEN AWARD IN MUSICAL SCHOLARSHIP
was established in 1998 by Dr. Sullivan F. Marsden for a written paper on
a topic that might lie outside the normal core of scholarship at the Blair
School of Music. The award will be an annual $1,000 prize to encourage
and recognize excellence in scholarship. Mr. Sullivan F. Marsden made
additional contributions to create an endowed fund in 2005.
THE THOMAS W. MARTIN MEMORIAL AWARD was established in 1992
by multiple donors to support an award recognizing an outstanding undergraduate physical chemistry student at the College of Arts and Science.
This fund was established in memory of Thomas W. Martin Jr., chair of the
Department of Chemistry from 1967 to 1970.
The Carl Mason Award was established in 1986 to provide assistance to incoming graduate students in the area of environmental engineering in the School of Engineering.
The Delene Laubenheim McClure Memorial Prize in Opera
was established in 1997 by multiple donors to provide support for voice
majors who exhibit excellence in opera at the Blair School of Music.
THE JOHN T. AND LIZZE ALLEN MCGILL AWARD was established in
1960 by Mrs. John T. McGill to provide an award to one or more residents of McGill Hall who have the best developed qualities of leadership
and scholarship. This fund was established in memory of Mrs. McGill’s
husband who passed away in 1946, and who spent his life in service to
Vanderbilt as a student in the class of 1879, professor emeritus of chemistry, Dean of the School of Pharmacy, and historian of the university. Preference in awarding is for a freshman with financial need.
THE MERRILL MOORE AWARD was established in 1961 by Mrs. Merrill
Moore, Vanderbilt alumna and widow of the late Merrill Moore, M.D. 1928,
to provide a cash award to a student graduating from Vanderbilt University
or a junior or senior student on the basis of the student’s literary promise
and the psychological or practical usefulness of award to him/her at the
College of Arts and Science. Dr. Moore was an internationally known Boston psychiatrist and a poet.
THE HENRIETTA HICKMAN MORGAN MEMORIAL PRIZE was established in 1946 by William B. Morgan II to provide awards to freshmen
students with the best pieces of original writing at the College of Arts
and Science. This fund was established in memory of the donor’s wife,
Henrietta Hickman Morgan. Mrs. Morgan received her B.A. in 1938 from
Vanderbilt University and was a member of the Kappa Alpha Theta sorority, and Phi Beta Kappa Phi Sigma Iota, an honorary romance language
group. She served as flag secretary and aide to Rear Admiral Martin K.
Metcalf for more than two years before falling ill in 1945.
THE NED PARKER NABERS AWARD was established in 1984 by multiple
donors to provide an annual prize for the best essay or research paper by
an undergraduate student in the fields of classical archaeology or ancient
art or architecture. The fund was established in memory of Ned Parker
Nabers who served on faculty from 1966 until his death in 1984.
THE DANA W. NANCE PRIZE was established in 1985 by Professor Francis C. Nance, B.A. 1953, and family to provide an annual award to a student at the College of Arts and Science. The award will recognize an outstanding student from the pre-medical curriculum who has demonstrated
perseverance in overcoming academic, financial, or social obstacles to
succeed, who is well-trained in the technical skills acquired through the

44
undergraduate pre-medical curriculum, and who possesses an abiding
sense of ethical and moral concern for the patient. The fund was established to honor Dana W. Nance, B.A. 1925, M.D. 1929, who served for
many years as the area chairman of the Vanderbilt Alumni Fund.
The Elliott and Ailsa Newman Clarinet Award was established
in 1999 through the bequest of Ailsa MacKay Newman along with additional
memorial gifts to provide an award to a deserving clarinet student at the
Blair School of Music. Preference when awarding is given to a clarinet major
who shows strong musical promise. If a clarinet major is not available, the
award should be given to a woodwind student. This fund is named for Mrs.
Newman and her husband, who predeceased her.
THE L. HOWARD NICAR MEMORIAL FUND was established in 1997 by
multiple donors to award a prize or scholarship to a collegiate student at the
Blair School of Music. This fund was established in memory of L. Howard
Nicar, former Assistant Dean of Admissions at the Blair School of Music.
THE DONALD E. PEARSON AWARD was established in 1980 by the
Chemistry Department and endowed in 2008 by Dr. and Mrs. Frank
Pinkerton to provide support for an annual award to an outstanding chemistry major who has done undergraduate research in chemistry. Professor
Donald E. Pearson served as faculty in the Department of Chemistry at the
College of Arts and Science until his retirement in 1986.
THE PHI BETA KAPPA CENTENNIAL AWARD was established in 1998 by
the Phi Beta Kappa Council to provide support for an annual award at the
College of Arts and Science. This fund, established in celebration of the
Alpha of Tennessee chapter’s centennial in 2001, will be presented to a
Vanderbilt senior who has been elected to Phi Beta Kappa in their junior
year and who has demonstrated excellence in several different fields of
academic endeavor, and has applied his or her intellectual talents in extracurricular activities within the university or community that exemplify a
dedication to improve the human condition.
THE EMILY ANN BENNETT PLANT AWARD IN ANTHROPOLOGY was
established in 1995 by Emily Ann Bennett Plant, B.A. 1994, to provide
financial support based on merit and need to recognize excellence in the
study of anthropology at the College of Arts and Science. The award may
be applied to the cost of tuition and living expenses or to fund supplemental educational activities that will enrich the study of anthropology, such as
summer research or participation in a field school.
THE ROBERT PETER PRATT MEMORIAL AWARD was established in
1991 by multiple donors to honor Robert Peter Pratt (1954–1991), former
associate director of Undergraduate Admissions and longtime leader in
promoting diversity within the student population. The award is presented
annually to the Chancellor’s Scholar whose accomplishments best exemplify Peter Pratt’s commitment to diversity and unity, leadership and cooperation, warmth and openness, and unselfish service to others. The award
recognizes a Chancellor’s Scholar of junior or senior standing whose campus leadership and service promote diversity and enhance understanding among the various groups that comprise the university community.
Academic performance is also considered in selecting the award recipient.
The David Rabin Prize was established in 1985 by multiple donors to
provide an annual prize to a student chosen on the basis of music ability and talent at the Blair School of Music. This prize was established in
memory of Dr. David Rabin, former professor of medicine in obstetrics and
gynecology at the School of Medicine. Dr. Rabin passed away in 1984.
The Jerry Reves Student Athlete GPA Award was established
through funds from the terminated trust of Dr. Joseph Gerald Reves, Jr.,
B.A. 1965, to annually fund a plaque for the student-athlete with the highest GPA.
THE JIM ROBINS AWARD was established in 1969 by Michael G. Wagner, B.A. 1957, to honor the memory of James A. Robins, class of 1892,
whose life and teaching exemplified selfless devotion to learning, to honor,
to participate in sports and to service to youth and Vanderbilt. The prize is
awarded to a member of the football team voted as the most outstanding
representative of the group.

vanderbilt university
THE JOE L. ROBY NROTC ESPRIT DE CORPS AWARD was established
in 2006 by Mr. Duff Anderson and Mr. W. Patrick McMullan III, B.A. 1974,
to recognize and reward Vanderbilt NROTC Midshipmen who display
outstanding enthusiasm and esprit de corp as members of the battalion
through involvement in NROTC and university activities and provide inspiration to fellow midshipmen and students at Vanderbilt University. The award
was created in honor of Joe L. Roby, B.A. 1961, Vanderbilt trustee emeritus, and a former Battalion Commanding Officer of the Vanderbilt NROTC
Midshipmen Battalion in recognition of his inspiring leadership at Vanderbilt
University and with the Vanderbilt Naval ROTC program and his subsequent
service in the United States Navy.
THE KATHRYN SEDBERRY POETRY PRIZE was established in 2003
through the estate of Kathryn Sedberry, M.A. 1963, to provide support
for an annual poetry prize in the Department of English at the College of
Arts and Science.
The James G. Stahlman NROTC Award was established in 1972 by
former Vanderbilt Trustee, James Geddes Stahlman, B.A. 1919, to provide an award to the top Navy ROTC member and the top Marine ROTC
member from the senior class who have proven themselves to be the most
outstanding in citizenship, scholarship, and leadership in the Naval ROTC
unit. The award recipients will be chosen by their Commanding Officer.
THE DAVID STEINE ECONOMICS AND BUSINESS AWARD was established in 2006 by James B. Johnson Jr., B.A. 1954, to recognize undergraduates for excellence in the Corporate Strategy competition in the Managerial Studies Program at the College of Arts and Science. The award was
established to honor the memory and distinguished career of David Stein, a
professor held in the highest esteem by the donor.
THE STEIN STONE MEMORIAL AWARD was established in 1948 by Mrs.
James N. Stone to provide an award to students in the School of Engineering. This fund is to be awarded to a graduating senior who has lettered in a
sport, preferably football, and who is judged to have made the most satisfactory scholastic and extramural progress as an undergraduate. This fund
was established in memory of Mrs. Stone’s late husband, James “Stein” N.
Stone, student at the School of Engineering in 1908 and an “All Southern”
center on the Vanderbilt University football team from 1904 to 1907.
THE HENRY LEE SWINT AWARD was established in 1976 by Frank A.
Woods, B.A. 1963, LL.B. 1966, for an undergraduate history major with
the best history essay or research paper in the Department of History at
the College of Arts and Science. The fund was established in honor of
Henry Lee Swint, a former Holland N. McTyeire Professor of History who
served on the faculty from 1939 until his retirement in 1977.
The Robert D. Tanner Undergraduate Research Award was
established in 2005 by multiple donors to provide an award to an undergraduate student conducting research in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the School of Engineering. This award was established in honor
of Dr. Robert D. Tanner, emeritus faculty, at the time of his retirement. Dr.
Tanner was a professor of chemical engineering at Vanderbilt University.
THE JOEL TELLINGHUISEN PHI BETA KAPPA AWARD was established
in 2006 by James B. Johnson, Jr., B.A. 1954, to recognize undergraduate
students who have been initiated into Phi Beta Kappa and have shown
exceptional ability at the College of Arts and Science. The award honors
Joel Tellinghuisen, Professor of Chemistry, for his positive impact and influence in educating undergraduate students at Vanderbilt, including Mr.
Johnson’s daughter, Katherine Johnson, B.S. 1994, M.Ed. 1995. The annual awards will be made to graduating seniors who are members of Phi
Beta Kappa, in recognition of outstanding performance in research as an
undergraduate at Vanderbilt.
The Underwood Memorial Award was established in 1961 by
Newton Underwood to support a senior in the Department of Physics or
Department of Biology selected alternately by the head of the physics department and the head of the biology department to be awarded each
year at commencement. The award honors his father, Judge Emory Marvin
Underwood, A 1900, L 1902, and a member of the Vanderbilt Board of
Trust from 1922 until his death in 1960, who devoted his life to justice and
to bringing out the best in people.

Undergraduate Catalog / Financial Information
THE JACQUELINE AND MORRIS WACHS ESSAY PRIZE was established
in 1999 by multiple donors to support a prize in the Department of French
and Italian at the College of Arts and Science. This fund was established
in memory of Jacqueline Wachs, former French professor from 1966 until
her retirement in 1994, and Morris Wachs, emeritus professor of French at
Vanderbilt. Mrs. Wachs died in 1999 and Mr. Wachs died in 2001.
The Walther Award for Vucept Excellence (WAVE) was established in 2005 by Beverly R. Walther and Michael C. Walther II to reward the
outstanding service of undergraduates participating in the VUcept program
at Vanderbilt University.
THE THOMAS M. WESER AWARD was established in 1989 by multiple
donors to provide support for an annual award honoring an international
student who has demonstrated an exceptional commitment to intellectual
life, cross-cultural appreciation, and personal integrity at Vanderbilt University. Weser Award recipients are typically active in student organizations and
community service projects outside of the classroom and maintain a solid
record of academic performance at the undergraduate or graduate level.
This fund was established in memory of Thomas M. Weser, an exchange
student from Germany who was killed while attending Vanderbilt University
in 1988.
THE MARTIN WILLIAMS AWARD was established in 1992 by multiple donors to provide an award to a music major writing the most outstanding
paper for a music theory or literature/history course at the Blair School of
Music. This fund was established in memory of Martin Williams, Director of
the Smithsonian Institution’s Jazz Program and Adjunct Professor of Jazz
History at the Blair School of Music.
The Frank A. Woods Award in History was established in 2008 by
Mr. James Lachs, B.S. 1993, to provide an award for a graduating senior
majoring in history with the most distinguished academic record at the
College of Arts and Science.
THE KATHERINE B. WOODWARD PRIZE IN SPANISH was established
in 1943 by Katherine B. Woodward, B.A. 1919, to provide an award to
the student with the highest average majoring in Spanish at the College
of Arts and Science. Preference in awarding will be given to senior year
students. Miss Woodward served as a teacher then head of the Spanish
Department at the Woodrow Wilson High School in Portsmouth, Virginia,
from 1919 until her retirement in 1956. She had a deep love for Vanderbilt
and an intense interest in promoting the teaching of Spanish.

45

College of
Arts and Science
A&S

A Community for Liberal Learning

48

Degree Program in the College

50

Additional Programs

56

Honors

61

Academic Regulations

63

Programs of Study

71

Courses

141

Administration and Faculty

221

48

vanderbilt university

A Community for Liberal Learning
“The work of the College of Arts and Science is
fundamental. It is the basis of all professional study.
No professional school can be self-sufficient. The
College in its undergraduate and graduate work must
remain the heart of the whole situation, and send its
quickening life blood into every fiber and tissue.”
—Chancellor James H. Kirkland
		 at the semicentennial celebration of the university
		October 1925

C

HANCELLOR Kirkland’s words were prophetic of our
times as well as true of his own. Since its founding Vanderbilt has pursued its mission of excellence in the liberal
arts with a commitment to liberal learning that is the special
concern of the College of Arts and Science. Liberal learning
endures because it brings men and women to subjects, concepts,
and modes of thought that enable them to think critically about
where humanity has been and where it ought to be going. The
liberal arts spark curiosity and broaden vision, help to instill
understanding of matters otherwise unknown, and encourage
individuals to live their lives with a sense of purpose, context,
and relatedness. A liberal education has perennial relevance and
usefulness: it should prepare its recipients to think precisely, to
reason clearly, and to judge wisely—all practical considerations
in the pursuit of constructive and satisfying lives and in the
practice of today’s professions and vocations.
Today the College of Arts and Science maintains its
historic position as the heart of the university. Excellence in
undergraduate and graduate education is its unwavering aim.
The College of Arts and Science provides intellectual stimulation, training, and incentive designed to foster the lifelong
liberal learning of its graduates. It offers challenging, forwardlooking programs of study in the humanities, natural sciences,
and social sciences resourcefully taught by distinguished
faculty recognized for excellence in research, scholarship, and
creative expression. It promotes self-realization and expression in the context of social responsibility.

Faculty and Students
The College of Arts and Science derives its strength from the
range of its academic offerings, from the quality of the faculty
who teach, and from the quality of the students who come to
learn. Traditionally fortunate in its ability to attract and retain
a superior faculty, the College of Arts and Science has more
than 500 full-time professors who supplement their achievements in the classroom with significant research, creativity, and
writing. Many faculty members hold awards for distinguished
scholarship and have been elected to high offices in their
professional associations, including the Classical Association of
the Middle West and South, the American Economics Association, the American Political Science Association, the American
Philosophical Association, the American Physical Society, the
American Historical Association, and the Biophysical Society.
The quality of the College’s faculty is matched by that of
its diverse student body. Undergraduates come from the fifty
states and fifteen to twenty foreign countries and are almost
evenly divided between men and women.

Academic Support
The Writing Studio / Arts and Science Tutoring
The Writing Studio provides undergraduate students the
opportunity to meet with trained writing consultants to discuss individual writing concerns, from invention to drafting
to revision. The Writing Studio provides a space for students
to discuss work-in-progress with expert writers, to create their
own writing, and to utilize available resources for improving
both writing and critical thinking skills.
The mission of the Vanderbilt Writing Studio is to enhance
student writing and writing instruction, and to encourage
regular conversation about the writing process. The Writing
Studio’s extensive programming includes individual consultations, creative writing groups, workshops focused on specific
issues in academic writing, open-mike readings, and studentrun writers’ support groups.
The Writing Studio is located at 1801 Edgehill Avenue, Suite
112, and there is a satellite location in 217 Commons Center
convenient to the first-year residence halls. The Writing Studio
website can be accessed at vanderbilt.edu/writing.
One-on-one tutoring in many subjects is available through
Tutoring Services, also located at 1801 Edgehill Avenue. Consultations in the Writing Studio and in Tutoring Services are
free to all undergraduates.
Computers
The following locations are available for walk-in use of computers and software:
Center for Second Language Studies (Furman Hall 001) —
2 Macintosh and 2 Windows systems, iPads, and digital
recorders for student use in the center
Stevenson computer lab and lounge (Stevenson Center 2200)
— 30 Windows systems
Wilson computer lab (Wilson Hall 120) – 30 Windows
systems
All of the college’s computer labs and classrooms offer a
wide variety of “courseware” and commercial “productivity
software,” including word processing packages. Color printing and scanners are available in most of the labs. In addition
to accessing software on the local servers, students may also
connect to both campus services and the internet, including
VUGmail and e-resources in the libraries, as well as course
materials in Brightspace. While use of the above facilities is
free, printing is charged per page.
The computer classrooms in the Center for Second Language
Studies and Wilson Hall are available for walk-in use during
the late afternoon and evening hours. Stevenson Center lab and
lounge are card-accessible weeknights until 1:00 a.m. All lab
hours are posted by semester at as.vanderbilt.edu/vuit/computer_
services/facilities/Labs.php. In addition to the college facilities, a
few “kiosk” systems are available in the Sarratt Student Center.
As a result, access to computers in the College of Arts and Science is extensive.
At last count, more than 98 percent of Vanderbilt students
own a personal computer. Since all students also have a highspeed network connection, it is convenient for students to

College of Arts and Science / A Community for Liberal Learning

49

have their own system (please consult the ResNet guidelines
for supported systems). However, most students will find that
the college computing facilities provide all of the computing
resources that are needed for success at Vanderbilt.

THE WAITE PHILIP FISHEL LECTURE. Established in 1974 as a tribute
to Professor Fishel, who was known as an outstanding, popular teacher
and was renowned for his research in metallurgy. Through the generosity
of family, colleagues, students, and friends, the lecture is presented by a
leading inorganic chemist.

The Advising System
Entering first-year students are assigned faculty advisers from CASPAR (College of Arts and Science Pre-major
Academic Advising Resources Center). These first advisers,
called “pre-major faculty advisers,” counsel students during
their first three and one-half semesters, or until the students
choose majors, when they are assigned faculty advisers in their
major department or program. Pre-major faculty advisers are
especially trained to help students move efficiently through
the requirements of AXLE (Achieving Excellence in Liberal
Education) and chart a course of study.
During the last two years of study, when a student is
acquiring depth of knowledge in a major field, studies are
guided by a specialist in that field. Students are encouraged
to see their faculty advisers at any time, since the advisers are
available for guidance and counseling and are faculty members with whom advisees may be studying.
All students are required to see their faculty advisers prior
to registration for each semester.
Advisers are generally happy to talk over any problems
students may have, although their chief function is academic
counseling. In addition, several members of the Office of the
Associate Deans of the College, themselves teaching faculty
members, have as their principal duty counseling students
and referring them to sources of expertise on non-academic
problems.

THE HARRY C. HOWARD JR. LECTURESHIP. Established in 1994 at
the Robert Penn Warren Center for the Humanities in honor of Harry C.
Howard Jr. (B.A. 1951). The lectureship was endowed by Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Nash Jr. and Mr. and Mrs. George Renfro, all of Asheville, North
Carolina, in honor of their longtime friend and attorney. The lectureship
allows the Warren Center to bring an outstanding scholar to Vanderbilt
annually to deliver a lecture on a significant topic in the humanities.

Public Lectures
THE BERRY LECTURES. Established in 1988 through the generosity of
Kendall and Allen Berry, John and Shirley Lachs, Steve Turner, and Jim
Burke. Three annual lectures—the Berry lecture, the Steve Turner lecture,
and the Jim Burke lecture—are given by distinguished philosophers.
THE LOUIS JACOB BIRCHER LECTURE IN CHEMISTRY. Established in
1976 in recognition of Professor Bircher’s forty-one years of service to
Vanderbilt beginning in 1921. He served as the sole professor of physical
chemistry until 1954, was chair of the Department of Chemistry from 1955
to 1961, and retired as professor emeritus in 1962. Family, colleagues,
students, and friends of Professor Bircher have provided generous support for the series. The lecture is presented by a leading physical chemist.
THE BYRN HISTORY LECTURE. Established in 1986 and endowed by the
late J. W. Byrn of Dickson, Tennessee, a student and admirer of the thought
of the British historian Arnold Toynbee. Annual lectures deal with his fields of
interest: world history, philosophy of history, and historiography.
THE FREDERICK LEROY CONOVER MEMORIAL LECTURE. First given
in 1977 in honor of Vanderbilt’s first analytical chemist. Professor Conover
came to Vanderbilt in 1923 and remained for thirty-seven years. Lectures
given by a distinguished analytical chemist are supported by family, colleagues, students, and friends of Professor Conover.
THE WALTER CLYDE CURRY SHAKESPEARE LECTURE. Inaugurated in
1982 and funded by one of his former students, this lectureship honors the
late Walter Clyde Curry, distinguished medieval and Renaissance scholar,
author of books on Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Milton, and for forty years
beloved professor of English at Vanderbilt. Bringing to campus in alternate
years eminent Shakespearean scholars and experienced Shakespearean
performers, the lectureship gratefully recognizes Professor Curry’s devoted service and lasting contributions to the university.

THE ARTHUR WILLIAM INGERSOLL MEMORIAL LECTURE. Established in
1973 to honor Arthur Ingersoll, professor of organic chemistry at Vanderbilt
until his death in 1969. Each year contributions for this lecture are received
from family, colleagues, students, and friends. A leading organic chemist is
invited to present the lecture.
THE CARL K. SEYFERT LECTURE IN ASTRONOMY. Established in 1983
as part of the astronomy program’s commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the Arthur J. Dyer Observatory. The lectureship recognizes the untiring efforts and contributions to astronomy made by Carl K. Seyfert, professor of astronomy and first director of the Dyer Observatory. A distinguished
astronomer is invited to present this lecture every third year.
THE SHANKS LECTURES. Established in 1984 and named for E. Baylis
Shanks and Olivia H. Shanks in honor of their accomplishments in the
fields of mathematics and education and in recognition of their loyalty
and service to Vanderbilt University, these lectures are presented on two
successive days in the fall of each year. A special committee from the
Department of Mathematics, influenced by the professional interests of
Professor and Mrs. Shanks, chooses the lecturers from mathematicians of
the highest reputation. The topics of the lectureship vary from year to year
according to the area of specialization of the speaker chosen. The lectures
have been endowed by members of the family of Olivia and Baylis Shanks.
THE FRANCIS G. SLACK LECTURES IN PHYSICS. Established in 1977
by the Department of Physics and Astronomy in honor of Francis G. Slack,
former Landon C. Garland professor of physics and chair of the department, these lectures recognize his many contributions to physics. The
series was first partially endowed by his colleagues and students and then
with the generous help of Professor Slack. Each speaker gives one lecture
of general interest to the university and one more specialized lecture for
the department.
THE DAVID STEINE LECTURE. Established in 1978 as a memorial to David
Steine, professor of business administration in the Department of Economics and Business Administration, by members of his family, friends, and associates. The lecture is devoted to an economic problem of interest to the
general public.
THE GERTRUDE VANDERBILT AND HAROLD S. VANDERBILT VISITING
WRITERS PROGRAM. Established in the Department of English in 1958
under the generous sponsorship of the late Mrs. Vanderbilt, this program
has annually presented readings and public lectures by a poet, a novelist,
and a critic—each of whom also visits classes and meets informally with
members of the university and Nashville communities. Recent participants
have included Dannie Abse, Madison Smartt Bell, Ellen Gilchrist, Alison
Lurie, Czeslaw Milosz, Wyatt Prunty, Ann Thwaite, Anthony Thwaite, and
Helen Vendler.

A&S

50

vanderbilt university

Degree Program in the College
The Bachelor of Arts
The bachelor of arts degree is granted upon successful completion of the following five requirements:
1. At least 120 semester hours of creditable college work,
2. A final grade point average of at least 2.000,
3. Completion of the AXLE requirements,
4. Completion of one of the options listed under Area of
Concentration,
5. Completion of at least 102 credit hours of course work
within the College of Arts and Science, or a minimum of 90
credit hours for those students with a second major outside
the College of Arts and Science.
Limitation on Credit Hours outside the College
Candidates for the bachelor of arts degree must successfully
complete a minimum of 102 credit hours within the College of
Arts and Science. Students who are completing an approved
second major from one of the other schools within Vanderbilt
are required to complete 90 credit hours within the College of
Arts and Science for the bachelor of arts degree.

AXLE: Achieving Excellence in
Liberal Education
The Arts and Science core program of study—known as
AXLE—is anchored in intensive practice in writing and a
diverse thirteen-course component of classes that has been
designed to allow maximum choice in course selection (based
on student interests and achievement levels). At the same time,
the distribution requirements of AXLE ensure that students
will explore intellectually and academically the breadth of possibilities represented by the liberal arts.
What Is Liberal Education?
The study of the liberal arts—what is historically called a
liberal education—is the oldest and most venerable form of
higher education. It has proved itself perennially flexible and
adaptive over the past centuries, and it remains the single best
educational preparation for further, specialized study in the
professions (medicine, law, education, business, et al.), as well
as for doctoral work in the humanities and social sciences and
advanced research in the sciences. The holistic focus of a liberal
education encompasses all areas of human knowledge: the
natural and social sciences, mathematics, foreign languages and
cultures, the arts, and the humanities. The empirical disciplines
guide us in our efforts to live most productively and efficiently.
But the rest of the curriculum—the humanities and the arts—
makes it possible to reflect upon the right use of the remarkable
scientific knowledge we have acquired. In a liberal arts education, content is always considered in its larger context. Thus, the
reflective and discursive aspects of study in the liberal arts call
upon students to move beyond the mere acquisition of information to inquire into the deeper issues within their studies, and

to connect their learning across disciplines and cultures as they
live and work in the communal environment of Vanderbilt. The
end product of a successful liberal arts education is a thoughtful
citizen who is prepared to take up his or her rights and responsibilities in a democratic society, to analyze and critique received
information, to articulate the issues at hand or the personal
values at stake, and whose intellectual life is marked by ongoing
internal dialogue about the quality and meaning of life for him
or her, as well as for the community at large.
Fear No Learning!
The interdisciplinary inclination of many courses in the College
of Arts and Science is an ideal training ground for learning new
methodologies for problem solving in the complex, global world
of the 21st century. Here, students may work with biologists and
psychologists in the Neuroscience program; study with creative
writers, sociologists, historians, or cinema and media arts scholars in the African American and Diaspora Studies program;
or take a class, team taught, by professors from the School of
Music and the Department of English in the College of Arts and
Science. Over the course of a Vanderbilt education, students
challenge themselves with the academic demands of the classes
they select, and are challenged by new ideas and unfamiliar
ways of looking at issues. Exploring beyond the boundaries of
one’s intellectual comfort zone in order to admit new ideas is
one of the most important aspects of higher education. The
time and effort devoted to selecting thoughtfully the courses
that will satisfy AXLE requirements prepare students for the
more specialized study that they undertake in their major (or
majors) beginning in the third year of study.
What Is AXLE?
AXLE is the acronym for Achieving Excellence in Liberal
Education. It is the core curriculum that all students in the
College of Arts and Science must fulfill. The AXLE curriculum
is flexible and very user-friendly. It consists of two parts: the
Writing Requirement and the Liberal Arts Requirement.
The Writing Requirement has four segments: completion
of English 1100 or demonstration of basic skills in English
Composition; completion of a First-Year Writing Seminar;
completion of a 1000-level (introductory) writing course no
later than the fourth semester in residence; and completion of
a second 1000-level writing course OR a 2000, 3000, or 4000level (discipline-specific, major-oriented) writing course OR a
course in oral communication.
The Liberal Arts Requirement is composed of a total of
thirteen courses taken at Vanderbilt, and distributed across
six categories. The First-Year Writing Seminar and all writing
courses, and approved Oral Communication courses are also
counted in the thirteen-course Liberal Arts Requirement.

College of Arts and Science / Degree Program in the College

1. The Writing Requirement (three to four courses)
a. English Composition ENGL 1100 (appropriate test
score or one course)
b. First-Year Writing Seminar (one course)
c. 1000-level W Requirement (one course)
d. One 1000-level W or 2000, 3000, or 4000-level W or
approved Oral Communication course
2. The Liberal Arts Requirement (13 courses)
a. HCA — Humanities and the Creative Arts (three
courses)
b. INT — International Cultures (three courses)
c. US — History and Culture of the United States (one
course)
d. MNS — Mathematics and Natural Sciences (three
courses)
e. SBS — Social and Behavioral Sciences (two courses)
f. P — Perspectives (one course)
All students must also complete requirements for at least
one major (between 27 and 48 credit hours of course work)
and earn a minimum number of 120 earned credit hours in
order to graduate.
How to Get Started
The program of studies is divided approximately into thirds:
1/3 — courses to meet the requirements of the Writing and
Liberal Arts requirements;
1/3 — courses required to complete the chosen major;
1/3 — electives, which will complete the 120 credit hours
required for graduation.
These divisions are approximate and may differ for individual students.
For a student’s first semester, most selections should be
from the first group, courses that will fulfill the Writing and
Liberal Arts requirements. Academic background, career goals,
and general talents and interests will affect choice of courses.
Upon graduation, students in the College of Arts and Science will receive a bachelor of arts degree upon completion of
the other four requirements in addition to AXLE: fulfillment of
requirements for one major, a 2.000 average in the major, 120
cumulative earned credit hours, and a 2.000 average overall.
Where to Get Information
In addition to this catalog’s sections on the rules, regulations,
and policies of the College of Arts and Science as well as descriptions of the academic programs of all the undergraduate schools,
students may refer to the booklet, On the Road with AXLE, a
College of Arts and Science manual for entering students.
Where to Get Advice
Entering students are assigned pre-major faculty advisers from
CASPAR (College of Arts and Science Pre-major Academic
Advising Resources). Pre-major faculty advisers are carefully
selected and receive intensive training on how to help students
proceed effectively through the requirements of AXLE and
chart a course of study. These advisers will counsel students
through their first three and a half semesters or until they
declare a major. At that time, students are assigned faculty

51

advisers in their major departments. Students are encouraged
to see their advisers at any time; they must, however, consult
their pre-major faculty adviser three times during the first
year: during summer before the fall semester, prior to the
opening of enrollment windows for the spring semester, and
prior to the opening of enrollment windows for the fall semester of their second year. Prior to their first semester, entering
first-year students must consult in June with their pre-major
faculty adviser who will assist with course selections for
registration for the fall and begin to understand each student’s
interests and goals. (This initial contact is typically via phone
and/or email.)
Overview of AXLE
AXLE consists of two parts: the Writing Requirement (including a First-Year Writing Seminar) and the Liberal Arts
Requirement.

The First-Year Writing Seminar
The First-Year Writing Seminar is an integral part of the firstyear experience in the College of Arts and Science. Through
these seminars, first-year students engage in independent
learning and inquiry in an environment in which they can
express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive
class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression.
The small-group nature of these seminars allows for direct
student-faculty interaction that stresses training in techniques
of scholarly inquiry. The students’ written work and oral
presentations are subject to thoughtful critical review by the
faculty member, providing feedback that can be used to reconsider the manner in which they articulate their ideas and to
refine their skills in these areas. Thus, first-year students learn
not only about the subject matter of the seminar, but are also
exposed to new methods of acquiring knowledge, different
ways of expressing and sharing ideas, and unique opportunities to participate in critical inquiry.
All first-year students must enroll in a First-Year Writing
Seminar. (First-Year Writing Seminars in the College of Arts
and Science are numbered 1111.) This course may be taken
during the fall or the spring semester. Students are permitted
to enroll in only one First-Year Writing Seminar per semester.
All First-Year Writing Seminars also count in their appropriate distribution areas within the Liberal Arts Requirement, but
a second seminar will not count toward the writing requirement. Students who transfer into the College of Arts and
Science (whether from another school at Vanderbilt or from
another college or university) do not complete a First-Year
Writing Seminar. Students beyond their second semester in
residence may not register for First-Year Writing Seminars,
nor may First-Year Writing Seminars be repeated after
completion of the second semester in residence.

The Writing Requirement
Excellent communication skills, including the ability to articulate ideas and defend positions in writing, will be paramount
for the 21st-century graduates of Vanderbilt University;
therefore, all students in the College of Arts and Science must
successfully complete the Writing Requirement.

A&S

52

a) All students must demonstrate competence in English
composition. Appropriate skills in composition are essential
to successful progress at the university. Competence is demonstrated by completion of ENGL 1100 or any of the following
test-based or transfer-credit satisfiers:
i. SAT combined score of at least 660 on the EvidenceBased Reading and Writing section, with a minimum score of
27 on the Reading section and a minimum score of 28 on the
Writing and Language section (effective March 2016)
ii. ACT score of at least 27 on the English portion combined with a minimum score of 19 on the Writing portion
iii. ACT score of at least 30 on the English portion
iv. AP: minimum score of 4 on either the English Language or English Literature exam
v. IB: minimum score of 6 on the Higher level English
exam
vi. Transfer credit for ENGL 1100
vii. Transfer credit for ENGL 1210W, 1220W, 1230W, 1250W,
1260W, 1270W, or 1300W (if used to satisfy ENGL 1100, the
same transfer credit may not also count as meeting 1000-level
W requirement)
b) First-Year Writing Seminar (see above).
c) All students must successfully complete at least one Arts
and Science 1000-level writing course (indicated by a “W”)
at Vanderbilt University, regardless of AP or IB credits, SAT
scores, or ACT scores earned prior to matriculation. These
writing-intensive courses emphasize general writing skills
within the context of discipline-specific subject matter. All
students are encouraged to complete Part b of the Writing
Requirement as soon as possible; this requirement must be
completed no later than the fourth semester at Vanderbilt University. All Arts and Science 1000-level W courses
also count in their appropriate distribution areas within the
Liberal Arts Requirement. Students may not substitute a 2000
or higher-level writing course for the first 1000-level writing course requirement. Students may, however, complete a
writing course at the 2000 or higher-level before completing a
1000-level writing course so long as they complete a 1000-level
writing course by the end of their fourth semester at Vanderbilt.
d) All students must successfully complete either (1) a
second Arts and Science 1000-level W course, or (2) an Arts and
Science 2000, 3000, or 4000-level W course, or (3) an approved
course in oral communication at Vanderbilt University, regardless of AP or IB credits, SAT scores, or ACT scores earned
prior to matriculation. The 2000 and higher-level W courses
foster advanced, discipline-specific writing skills. Departments
or programs that offer these courses determine their specific
writing content. In 2000 or higher-level W courses, continued
attention to the process of writing is included in the classroom.
Students receive regular feedback on their writing that will contribute toward enhancing writing skills appropriate to specific
disciplines. The process of revising written work allows students
to reflect on the writing process; writing tutorials may also
be included. Oral communication courses focus on developing improved public speaking skills. These courses introduce
students to the principles and practices of public discourse and
reasoned argument. Attention to the process of effective oral
communication is integral to these classes. Students receive
regular speaking assignments throughout the semester and
regular feedback on their speaking that will contribute toward
enhancing effective speaking skills. All students must complete
Part d of the Writing Requirement before graduation. All
Arts and Science 2000 or higher-level W courses and approved

vanderbilt university

oral communication courses also count in their appropriate
distribution areas within the Liberal Arts Requirement.

The Liberal Arts Requirement
The Liberal Arts Requirement consists of successful completion
of thirteen courses from the College of Arts and Science. Most
courses in the College of Arts and Science fulfill one of these Liberal Arts requirements. Courses must carry three or more credits
to count toward the AXLE Liberal Arts Requirement. Although
some courses may be appropriate to more than one requirement,
each course will fulfill only one requirement. These thirteen
courses must be distributed as outlined below. They must be
taken from at least seven departments or subject areas.
a) Humanities and the Creative Arts — HCA (3 courses)
Courses in the humanities and the creative arts challenge
students to examine their personal understanding of life and
how their individual experiences overlap with those of the rest of
humankind. These courses testify to the varying ways in which
people think, form values, confront ambiguity, express spiritual
and aesthetic yearnings, and grapple with moral and ethical
problems. By analyzing and interpreting literary, philosophical,
religious, or artistic works, students examine the foundations
of human experience. By producing original artistic works in
imaginative writing, studio art, theatre, film, music, and dance,
students have the opportunity to connect the universal sources
of human inspiration with their own creative processes.
b) International Cultures — INT (3 courses)
The study of international culture provides students with a
basis for understanding the diversity of experiences and values
in our contemporary, global society. Options in this category
include not only international history and cultural studies
courses, but also courses in literature, cinema and media arts,
the social sciences, art, music, and languages. Students may
satisfy this requirement by choosing courses that focus on the
history and culture of a single society or time period in human
history and/or that represent a broad spectrum of different
human societies and time periods.
Language courses introduce students to the language of a
different culture and provide insight into that culture in ways
that are not possible to achieve through detached study. At
intermediate and advanced levels, students are able to explore
the culture in depth, using the language itself to read, discuss,
and write about its various aspects. Even at the most basic level,
exposure to the language of a different culture prepares students
to think and act in terms of living in a global community.
Intermediate and advanced language courses prepare students for study abroad programs, which the College of Arts and
Science strongly recommends. A maximum of one course in this
requirement may be satisfied through study abroad in a Vanderbilt-sponsored program, or in a pre-approved program offered
through another provider. A summer study abroad program
must earn 6 or more credit hours to satisfy this requirement.
In addition to the Vanderbilt-sponsored programs in France
and Germany, the Global Education Office maintains a list of
pre-approved programs.
Note: All students who study abroad must register with
International SOS (ISOS). Information is available on the GEO
website: vanderbilt.edu/geo.
Additional course credit may be earned toward AXLE curriculum requirements by successfully completing study abroad
courses through Vanderbilt in France or the Vanderbilt in

College of Arts and Science / Degree Program in the College

Berlin summer program that have A&S numbers and titles. No
other courses taken through either of these two programs or
through other study abroad programs, including courses offered
by Vanderbilt-approved programs and including courses that
are deemed to be direct equivalents to A&S courses, count
toward AXLE curriculum requirements.
All students must complete three courses in this category,
irrespective of previous language study or proficiency in a language other than English. At least one of the three courses presented in fulfillment of this category must be a second-semester
(or higher) language acquisition class taught at Vanderbilt
University (or through the Duke-UVa-Vanderbilt Partnership
for Less Commonly Taught Languages), unless the student
successfully demonstrates proficiency in a language other than
English at or above the level achieved by second-semester
language acquisition classes taught at Vanderbilt University.
Students may demonstrate proficiency in a number of ways:
SAT Subject Test scores (French, 540; German, 470; Hebrew,
530; Italian, 540; Japanese with Listening, 440; Latin, 530; Spanish, 520); by appropriate score on proficiency tests (written and
oral) administered by the Tennessee Foreign Language Institute;
or with AP or IB credit in a foreign language. The first semester
of an introductory language acquisition class in any language
a student has studied for at least two years in high school, or in
which a student transfers credit from another institution, cannot be used in partial fulfillment of this requirement. Intensive
elementary language courses that cover the content of two
semesters in one shall count as one course toward this category.
Students who, because of special ability and achievement,
are admitted to the College of Arts and Science without the
normally required two years of one foreign language in high
school must enroll in a foreign language course during their first
semester and must remain continuously enrolled until they successfully complete a full year of one foreign language. They must
complete this requirement by the end of their fourth semester in
the College of Arts and Science.
c) History and Culture of the United States — US (1 course)
The study of the history and culture of the United States
provides students with a basis for understanding the American
experience and the shaping of American values and viewpoints within the context of an increasingly global society.
Interpreting history and culture in the broadest sense, options
in this category include traditional history and cultural studies
courses, but also courses in literature, cinema and media arts,
the social sciences, art, and music, which illuminate historical
periods or cultural themes in United States history. Students
may satisfy this requirement by choosing a course that focuses
on the history and culture of a single social group or time
period in American history and/or that represents a broad
spectrum of different social groups and time periods.
d) Mathematics and Natural Sciences — MNS (3 courses,
one of which must be a laboratory science)
Courses in mathematics emphasize quantitative reasoning
and prepare students to describe, manipulate, and evaluate
complex or abstract ideas or arguments with precision. Skills
in mathematical and quantitative reasoning provide essential foundations for the study of natural and social sciences.
Students are generally introduced to mathematical reasoning
through the study of introductory courses in calculus or probability and statistics.
Courses in the natural sciences engage students in
hypothesis-driven quantitative reasoning that helps to explain
natural phenomena, the roles of testing and replication of

53

experimental results, and the processes through which scientific hypotheses and theories are developed, modified, or abandoned in the face of more complete evidence, or integrated
into more general conceptual structures. Laboratory science
courses engage students in methods of experimental testing of
hypotheses and analysis of data that are the hallmarks of the
natural sciences. Natural science courses prepare students to
understand the complex interactions between science, technology, and society; teach students to apply scientific principles to
everyday experience; and develop the capacity to distinguish
between science and what masquerades as science.
e) Social and Behavioral Sciences — SBS (2 courses)
Social scientists endeavor to study human behavior at
the levels of individuals, their interactions with others, their
societal structures, and their social institutions. The remarkable scope represented by these disciplines extends from
studying the underpinnings of brain function to the dynamics
of human social groups to the structures of political and economic institutions. The methods employed by social scientists
are correspondingly broad, involving approaches as varied
as mapping brain activity, discovering and charting ancient
cultures, identifying the societal forces that shape individual
and group behavior, and using mathematics to understand
economic phenomena. By studying how humans and societies function, students will learn about individual and societal
diversity, growth, and change.
f) Perspectives — P (1 course)
Courses in Perspectives give significant attention to individual and cultural diversity, multicultural interactions, sexual
orientation, gender, racial, ethical, and religious issues within a
culture across time or between cultures, thereby extending the
principles and methods associated with the liberal arts to the
broader circumstances in which students live. These courses
emphasize the relationship of divergent ethics and moral values
to contemporary social issues and global conflicts.

The Major
All students must successfully complete a course of study
leading to one of the approved major programs in the College
of Arts and Science, or successfully complete an individually
designed interdisciplinary major designed in consultation
with College of Arts and Science faculty and approved by the
Committee on Individual Programs in the College of Arts and
Science.
AXLE Curriculum Course Distribution
The distribution of Arts and Science courses into AXLE
categories is available in YES. Using the advanced-class-search
dialog box, use the pull-down menu under Class Attributes to
select an AXLE category.
AXLE, the Major, and the Optional Minor
Courses used to satisfy requirements of AXLE may also be used
to satisfy requirements of the major or the optional minor.
Advanced Placement under AXLE
Other than the basic English composition requirement, no
AXLE requirement may be fulfilled with any form of advanced
placement credit (AP, IB, A-level, etc.).

A&S

54

Transfer Credit under AXLE
Generally, only courses taken in the College of Arts and Science may be used toward AXLE; however, any college course
credit earned prior to graduation from high school, and
transfer credit earned before admission to Vanderbilt, may be
used toward fulfilling AXLE requirements.
Vanderbilt Study Abroad Programs and AXLE
Additional course credit may be earned toward AXLE curriculum requirements by successfully completing study abroad
courses through Vanderbilt in France or the Vanderbilt in Berlin
summer program that have A&S numbers and titles. No other
courses taken through either of these two programs or through
other study abroad programs, including courses offered by other
Vanderbilt-approved programs and including courses that are
deemed to be direct equivalents to A&S courses, count toward
AXLE curriculum requirements.
For more information on study abroad, see the chapter on
Special Programs for Undergraduates in the front section of
this catalog.

Area of Concentration
During the junior and senior years, much of the student’s work
is concentrated in one large unit of intellectually related courses.
The program of concentration may be arranged through a
single major, an interdisciplinary major, or a double major.
Each of the three options is described below. A triple major may
be declared with the approval of the Administrative Committee.
Major Field
Under this plan, the student majors in one of the recognized
fields. There shall not be fewer than 27 credit hours in the
major field, but a given department may require up to 48
credit hours. Students may take more than the required
number of credit hours in any major; any given department,
however, may limit the total permissible credit hours in a
discipline.
For graduation, a student must have achieved a grade point
average of at least 2.000 in all classes taken in the major. This set
of courses includes all courses a student takes in the department
or program of the major and all courses a student takes outside
the department or program that may count toward the major.
All courses that are listed as fulfilling credit hours required for
the major, as listed in the Undergraduate Catalog, are included
in calculating the grade point average in the major.
Within the framework of these general requirements, each
department has its own policies governing major work, which
are published elsewhere in this catalog or otherwise available to
students.

vanderbilt university

Academic programs of the College of Arts and Science are
varied and broad in scope, with departmental majors offered in
the following fields:
Anthropology
Art
Biological Sciences
Chemistry
Communication Studies
Earth and Environmental
Sciences
Ecology, Evolution, and
Organismal Biology
Economics
English
Environmental Sociology
French
German Studies
History

History of Art
Mathematics
Molecular and Cellular
Biology
Philosophy
Physics
Political Science
Psychology
Religious Studies
Russian
Sociology
Spanish
Spanish and Portuguese
Theatre

Students may also major in defined interdisciplinary programs
(listed below). There shall not be fewer than 27 credit hours in
the major field, but a given program may require up to 48 credit
hours. The student must achieve at least a 2.000 grade point
average in all work taken in the major.
African American and Diaspora Studies
American Studies
Asian Studies
Biochemistry and Chemical Biology
Cinema and Media Arts
Classical and Mediterranean Studies
Communication of Science and Technology
Economics and History
European Studies
French and European Studies
German and European Studies
Italian and European Studies
Jewish Studies
Latin American Studies
Latino and Latina Studies
Law, History, and Society
Medicine, Health, and Society
Neuroscience
Public Policy Studies
Spanish and European Studies
Spanish, Portuguese, and European Studies
Women’s and Gender Studies
Students may combine an interdisciplinary major with a
major in one of the recognized fields listed at the beginning of
this chapter.

College of Arts and Science / Degree Program in the College

Declaration of the Area of Concentration
Students may formally declare a major at any time during the
third semester of residence and must do so no later than the
Friday before Spring Break of the fourth semester. The student
selects a department or interdisciplinary program and applies
to that department or program for assignment to an adviser.
Students who wish to develop an individually designed interdisciplinary program apply to the associate dean who chairs
the Committee on Individual Programs.
Each fall a program is arranged that provides for consultation of sophomores with department chairs, for the purpose of
helping students select a major. Sophomore students who have
not declared a major should participate in this program if they
intend to attain junior standing before the next spring.
The selection of a major is of considerable importance,
and the entire program of concentration for the junior and
senior years should be planned with the major adviser before
the beginning of the junior year. Students officially declare
their majors by registering with the chosen department(s) or
interdisciplinary program(s), and with the Office of Academic
Services in Arts and Science. When the student’s major has been
registered, access to the student’s academic record is transferred
from the pre-major adviser to the new major adviser.
Students may not add a major(s) past the fifth class day of
the first semester of the senior year.
Individually Designed Interdisciplinary Majors
This plan permits students to contract for an individually
designed program of concentration consisting of at least 48
credit hours of approved work. The program is constructed
around a coherent academic purpose and may draw together
the academic resources of a number of departments and schools.
The program’s purpose may include topical, period, or area
studies, and must be consistent with the philosophy underlying
a liberal arts education (see “What is Liberal Education?” on
page 48 of this catalog). The program should not be designed
with a focus on pre-professional training (e.g., pre-business, prelaw, or pre-medicine). The student may be required to achieve
a standard of proficiency in appropriately related areas such as
foreign languages or mathematics in addition to the 48 credit
hours constituting the program of concentration.

55

Each student must identify a major adviser who will offer
advice and guidance. The major adviser must be a professor or
full-time senior lecturer in the College of Arts and Science.
The student’s plan for an individually designed interdisciplinary major is a statement of required courses. Furthermore,
because of the nature of interdisciplinary majors, all courses
that have previously been included in the student’s plan are
considered to be part of the major discipline. The student must
achieve at least a 2.000 grade point average in all courses that
are (or have been) part of the plan.
Upon approval of the Committee on Individual Programs
and the student’s adviser, (a) as many as 6 credit hours may be
counted as part of both the interdisciplinary major and the second major, or (b) normally, no more than three introductorylevel courses will be counted toward the interdisciplinary major.
Double and Triple Majors
This program permits a student to concentrate in two or three
fields, which may or may not be intellectually related. With
approval of the departments concerned, the student completes
all of the requirements stipulated for the majors. Triple majors
require approval of the Administrative Committee.
Each A&S non-interdisciplinary major must include at least
24 credit hours that are being counted solely toward the major.
This rule also applies to students who combine (in a double or
triple major) a non-interdisciplinary major with an interdisciplinary major.
Approved Second Majors Outside the College
All undergraduate courses, majors, and minors offered by Blair
School of Music, School of Engineering, and Peabody College
are approved for students in the College of Arts and Science.
See the appropriate sections of the Undergraduate Catalog
under each school for details. Arts and Science students with a
second major from another Vanderbilt undergraduate school
must earn a minimum of 90 credit hours in Arts and Science.
Consultation with the student’s Arts and Science major adviser
is especially important.

A&S

56

vanderbilt university

Additional Programs
For information on the College Scholars program and departmental honors, please see the chapter titled Honors.
The Optional Minor
A minor is a program within a recognized area of knowledge
offering students more than a casual introduction to the area
but less than a major in it. Although the completion of a minor
is not a degree requirement, students may elect to complete
the courses specified for one or more minors. A student who
completes all designated courses in a minor with a grade point
average of at least 2.000 will have the minor entered on the
transcript at the time of graduation.
Minors may be combined with any departmental major
or interdisciplinary major, but minors may not be earned in
the department or program of the major. Each minor must,
however, include at least 15 credit hours that are being counted
solely toward the minor. Courses may not be taken on a P/F
basis if they are offered in the department of the minor or if
they are being counted toward an interdisciplinary minor (see
Academic Regulations).
Minors consist of a minimum of five courses of 3 or more
credit hours each. Many minors require a greater number of
credit hours and specific courses. When a minor is offered in
a discipline that offers a major, only those courses that count
toward the major may be counted toward the minor.
Students should refer to the appropriate sections of this
catalog for specific requirements. Minors available at present
are listed below.
Students should declare their intention to pursue specific
minors by completing forms available in the Office of the
Associate Deans as well as the various departmental and
program offices. Departments and programs assign advisers to
students who declare minors in their respective areas. Students
have the responsibility to know and satisfy all requirements for
minors that they intend to complete.
Students may not add or change a minor after the final day
of classes in the second semester of their senior year.
Optional minors are offered in the following fields and
interdisciplinary programs:
Economics
African American and
Diaspora Studies
English
American Studies
Environmental and
Anthropology
Sustainability Studies
Arabic Language
European Studies
Art
French
Asian Studies
German Studies
Astronomy
History
Biological Sciences
History of Architecture
Brazilian Studies
History of Art
Chemistry
Islamic Studies
Chinese Language and
Italian Studies
Culture
Japanese Language and
Cinema and Media Arts
Culture
Communication of Science
Jewish Studies
and Technology
Latin American Studies
Communication Studies
Latino and Latina Studies
Earth and Environmental
Sciences

Managerial Studies:
Corporate Strategy
Financial Economics
Mathematics
Medicine, Health, and
Society
Mediterranean
Archaeology
Mediterranean Studies
Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology*
Neuroscience
Philosophy
Physics
Political Science

Portuguese
Psychology
Religious Studies
Russian
Scientific Computing*
Sociology
South Asian Language
and Culture
Spanish
Theatre
Undergraduate Business
Minor ^
Women’s and Gender
Studies

*Administered by the School of Engineering in collaboration with the College of Arts
and Science
^Administered by the four undergraduate schools and the Owen Graduate School
of Management

Approved Minors Outside the College
Arts and Science students are permitted to pursue a second
major and/or a minor that has been approved by the faculties of the other Vanderbilt undergraduate schools: the Blair
School of Music, the School of Engineering, and Peabody College of Education and Human Development. See the appropriate sections of the Undergraduate Catalog under each school
for details. Minors may not be earned in the department or
program of the major.
Undergraduate Research
All students have ample opportunity to participate in faculty
research projects or to pursue research projects independently,
both on campus and at remote sites. Such research has led to
the publication of coauthored or student-authored papers and
other presentations to the scholarly community. Summer and
academic year research by undergraduates in all fields may be
subsidized by the university or the College of Arts and Science.
Study Abroad Programs
Vanderbilt offers study programs for all undergraduate students from Arts and Science, Blair School of Music, School of
Engineering, and Peabody College to provide undergraduates
immediate contact with cultures different from their own and
to aid in the mastery of foreign languages. Students interested
in applying for study abroad should consult their advisers to
determine whether all degree requirements can be completed
on schedule.
Brochures on all approved programs are available in the
Global Education Office in Room 115, Student Life Center.
GEO also maintains a website, vanderbilt.edu/geo. The study
abroad programs are described in more detail in the chapter
on Special Programs for Undergraduates in the front section
of this catalog.
When choosing programs in a city for study abroad,
College of Arts and Science students may only apply to the
Vanderbilt-approved overseas program(s) in that city.

College of Arts and Science / Additional Programs

There are four cities/programs for which this rule does
NOT apply because of the specificity of the course of study
on the Vanderbilt programs: Institut d’Etudes Politiques in
Paris, France (designed for social science majors with a high
degree of French proficiency); St. Charles University in Prague,
Czech Republic (designed for Jewish studies majors); Classical
Studies in Rome, Italy (open ONLY to classical studies majors);
and Vienna, Austria (open ONLY to Blair students). That is,
Arts and Science students who wish to study in Paris, Prague,
Rome, or Vienna may choose to study in a program that is not
Vanderbilt-approved.
Additional Options
Students interested in receiving transfer credit for Vanderbiltapproved study abroad programs through other universities
should apply to the Committee on Individual Programs. They
must meet the same academic standards required for participation in Vanderbilt’s study abroad programs. Information is available from the Office of the Associate Deans (350 Buttrick Hall).
It should be noted, however, that if a program has been
approved for direct credit by Vanderbilt, it must be taken as
the approved direct-credit program by matriculated Vanderbilt students. In no case, after matriculating at Vanderbilt, may
a student apply to participate in an approved direct-credit
program for transfer credit through a different university, or
through an external agency, and then seek to transfer that
credit into Vanderbilt.

Pre-Professional Studies
Medicine
Students interested in the study of medicine should plan
their undergraduate programs in consultation with Professor
Michelle Grundy, health professions adviser. There is no formal
premedical program of courses in the College of Arts and
Science or elsewhere at Vanderbilt. Each student should plan a
program to meet individual needs. The program should include
whatever courses may be necessary to meet medical school
admission requirements, all courses required for the major, all
AXLE requirements, and elective options. Students may choose
majors from any of the four undergraduate colleges, and may
elect to pursue a double major or an interdisciplinary program
of concentration.
A student who plans to apply for admission to the Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, as well as other medical schools,
may choose either of the following options:
1. A student may qualify for admission with a B.A. degree,
whether completed in three years or in four. Minimum
requirements for admission generally would be met by completing at least two semesters of English, four semesters of
chemistry including organic, two semesters of biology, two
semesters of physics, and at least one semester of calculus/
math. Since prerequisites may vary across medical schools,
students are urged to consult the online resource, Medical
School Admission Requirements (MSAR) published by the
American Association of Medical Schools (at aamc.org) for
school-specific information.
In light of the Medical College Admissions Test (MCAT)
changes that took effect in 2015, it is recommended that
students take one semester of biochemistry and one
semester of introductory statistics. Additionally, through

57

course work or self-directed study, students will need to be
knowledgeable in basic concepts of psychology, sociology,
and bioethics.
For more information, students are advised to visit the website of the Health Professions Advisory Office (vanderbilt.edu/
hpao) and refer to the links for 1) “Premedical Preparation”
and 2) “Threading a path through premedical expectations.”
2. A student may qualify as a three-year student in the
senior-in-absentia program (see Senior-in-Absentia in this
catalog).
Dentistry
Students interested in predental studies should plan their
undergraduate program in consultation with Professor
Michelle Grundy, health professions adviser. There is no
formal predental program of courses at Vanderbilt. Predental
studies should include courses necessary to meet dental school
admission requirements, all courses required for the major,
all AXLE requirements, and elective options. Students may
choose majors from any of the four undergraduate colleges.
They may also elect a double major or an interdisciplinary
program of concentration. A student may apply to dental
school under the senior-in-absentia program (see Senior-inAbsentia in this catalog) or apply for admission after three
years of college work without a degree.
Any student contemplating application to dental school
should take at least two semesters of English, four semesters
of chemistry including organic, two semesters of biology, two
semesters of physics, and at least one semester of calculus/math.
Since prerequisites may vary across dental schools, students
are urged to consult the ADEA Official Guide to Dental Schools
published by the American Association of Dental Schools.
Nursing
Students interested in developing a program that could lead
to a master of science in nursing are advised to consult the
Office of Admissions in the School of Nursing. For further
information on pre-nursing studies, see the chapter on Special
Programs for Undergraduates near the front of this catalog.
Architecture
Undergraduate students in the College of Arts and Science
expecting to pursue architecture at the graduate level should
complete at least one year of analytic geometry and calculus and
one year of physics. Students may select any major but would
want to include courses that emphasize a broad sense of art and
architectural history, including courses in studio art. Before
applying to specific schools of architecture, they would develop
a portfolio of creative work. Further information is available
from the pre-architecture advisers: Professor Vesna Pavlović,
Department of Art, and Professor Kevin Murphy, Department
of the History of Art.
Engineering
Undergraduate students in the College of Arts and Science
expecting to pursue engineering at the graduate level should
normally major in a natural science or mathematics and, at a
minimum, should complete two years of calculus or its equivalent, one year each of chemistry and physics, and at least an
additional year of a natural science or mathematics. A minimum of one year of computer science is highly desirable. Students should seek specific information concerning admission

A&S

58

from the engineering school of their choice as early as possible,
preferably by the end of the sophomore year, to assure optimum
preparation for entry into that school. Standards for admission
vary, but usually a 3.00 average or better is required.
Law
There is no formal program of prelaw studies at Vanderbilt.
Most law schools have no specific requirements for a prelaw
curriculum but place great emphasis on the development of the
student’s ability to read and comprehend accurately, thoroughly, and rapidly; to speak and write clearly and correctly;
to think precisely; and to analyze complex situations and
weigh and appraise their several elements. The development
of analytical skills and of mature study habits is vital. A broad
cultural background is important—since law touches life at
every point, every subject in the college curriculum may bear
on the lawyer’s work. Students interested in the study of law
should plan their undergraduate programs in consultation with
Professor Carrie Russell, prelaw adviser, in the Department of
Political Science.
Management
Dual Five-Year Baccalaureate–M.B.A Program. By combining one and one-half years of study in the Vanderbilt Owen
Graduate School of Management with three and one-half
years in Vanderbilt’s College of Arts and Science, students may
obtain both the baccalaureate degree and the M.B.A. degree in
five years—the baccalaureate from the College of Arts and Science at the end of the fourth year under the senior-in-absentia
program, and the M.B.A. from the Owen School after the fifth.
Students may major in any subject in the College of Arts
and Science.
Students must apply to the Owen School for admission
to the five-year program during their junior year and to the
Administrative Committee of the College of Arts and Science
for acceptance into the senior-in-absentia program. Students
are subject to normal Owen School admission requirements,
and no student is assured of admission to the Owen School.
Students who are accepted will be registered in the Owen School
for three semesters (a minimum of 48 credit hours). Up to 16
credit hours of Owen School courses approved by the College
of Arts and Science may be counted toward completion of the
undergraduate degree. Upon acceptance to the Owen School,
students should contact the Office of Student Services for an
advising appointment. The Owen School registrar will review
undergraduate courses and arrange for transfer of those credit
hours toward the student’s M.B.A. degree.
Financial Aid. The scholarship or other financial aid commitment of the College of Arts and Science will not be continued automatically beyond the seventh semester for students
enrolled in the dual program. Eighth semester scholarships or
other financial aid are the responsibility of the Owen School.
The Owen School will advise students of the level of financial
support, if any, prior to their enrollment in the dual program,
to be provided during the eighth and subsequent semesters.
This ensures that an eighth semester scholarship from the
College of Arts and Science is protected for the student until a
final decision is made to enroll in the Owen School.
Planning for the Program. Students interested in this
program should consult William Damon or Malcolm Getz
in the Department of Economics, or the Owen Admissions

vanderbilt university

Office, for advice on planning undergraduate studies to meet
the program’s requirements.
Teacher Education
Details will be found in Licensure for Teaching in the Peabody
College section of this catalog.

Internships
Students may earn academic credit for the work of internships
in the College of Arts and Science on a Pass/Fail basis through
interdisciplinary or departmental internships. Credit hours
earned will not count toward major or minor requirements or
toward AXLE, but will count as part of the total credit hours
required for graduation. Students obtain their own placement
and faculty adviser who works with them to develop a list of
readings or research agenda for the internship, which must be
approved by the director of internships in the College of Arts
and Science (Associate Dean Yollette Jones). The necessary
forms for earning academic credit for an internship may be
obtained from the A&S Associate Deans’ Office in 350 Buttrick
Hall, although students register for internships through the
Office of Academic Services of their respective school. The
deadline for submitting registration forms to Dean Jones’s
office for internship courses taken during summer term and
fall semester is May 1. Students expecting to intern during the
spring semester should submit registration forms by January 1.
Finding an Internship
Students searching for an internship opportunity locally or
elsewhere should contact the Career Center.
Interdisciplinary Internships
INDS 3880 (fall, spring), 3884 (summer). 1 credit hour
(repeatable)
Any student who is at least a sophomore and in good academic
standing may earn one credit hour per semester or summer
for an internship under this designation. This course may be
repeated twice for a maximum of 3 credit hours exclusively on
a Pass/Fail basis.
Departmental Internships
Maximum of 15 credit hours (may be taken only once)
Under this option students from any discipline may earn
academic credit for internships in the departments listed
below if they meet the minimum GPA requirements and
have 6 credit hours of prior work in the department in which
they wish to intern. Students are responsible for securing a
faculty adviser for the internship and developing an academic
plan of work for the internship opportunity, both of which
must be approved by the director of undergraduate studies in
the department in which the internship is housed. (In some
instances, the DUS will serve as the faculty adviser for all
internships taken in that discipline.) All internships under
this designation are taken concurrently with a research and/or
readings course. The latter is taken on a graded basis and may
count toward requirements for a major or minor. Students
should consult the director of undergraduate studies in the
department of interest to obtain additional information about
internships in that discipline. The following departments
offer up to 15 credit hours of academic credit per semester

College of Arts and Science / Additional Programs

or summer for the following courses (internship courses are
offered during FALL, SPRING, and SUMMER sessions):
AADS 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3881: Internship
Readings and Research [3–6].
AMER 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–6], 3881: Internship
Readings and Research [3–6].
ANTH 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3881: Internship
Readings and Research [1–6].
CMA 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3881: Internship Readings and Research [1–6].
FREN 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training in France [1], 3881: Internship Readings and Research in France [3].
HART 3880, 3883. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3883: Internship Research [1–3].
HIST 3880, 3882–3883. 3880: Internship Training [3–9], 3882: Internship
Readings [3], 3883: Internship Research [3].
JS 3880, 3883. 3880: Internship Training [1–3], 3883: Internship Research
[3].
LAS 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3881: Internship Readings and Research [3-6].
MHS 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3881: Internship Readings and Research [1–6].
PSCI 3880, 3882–3883. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3882: Internship
Readings [1–3], 3883: Internship Research [1–3].
RUSS 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3881: Internship
Readings and Research [3–6].
SOC 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3881: Internship Readings and Research [3–6].
SPAN 3880–3881. 3880: Internship Training in Spain [1], 3881: Internship
Readings and Research in Spain [3].
WGS 3880, 3882–3883. 3880: Internship Training [1–9], 3882: Internship
Readings [1–3], 3883: Internship Research [1–3].

More complete information regarding departmental internship courses may be found in the course descriptions in this
catalog. (Courses which have been approved recently by the faculty may not appear in the most recent edition of the catalog.)
Cost of an Internship
Internships taken during the fall or spring semester will fall
under the normal tuition charge unless the student falls below
12 or exceeds 18 credit hours during the semester. In both
instances, the hourly tuition charge will apply with permission
for an underload/overload from the appropriate academic dean.
Students will be charged for internships taken during summer
on the basis of the hourly tuition rate for summer school unless
approved in advance to receive the internship subsidy (see the
Career Center website).

Combined B.A./M.A. (4+1) Program
The College of Arts and Science offers students in many
departments and programs the opportunity to earn both the
bachelor’s degree and the master’s degree in a shorter period
of time and at less cost than is normally the case. Exceptional
students in the College of Arts and Science can obtain both
degrees in an expedited period, typically within but not less
than five years.

59

The usual period of study for both the bachelor’s and the
master’s degree is six years. Through the 4+1 option, the student and her or his adviser plan a five-year program of study.
It is important to note that there is no provision for obtaining
both degrees in a period shorter than five years. The program
is intended for selected students for whom the master’s degree
is sufficient preparation for their career goals, is desirable as
a goal in itself, or is viewed as additional preparation before
pursuing a doctorate or a professional degree.
The areas of study available for the Combined B.A./M.A.
(4+1) option within Arts and Science are determined by
individual departments and programs, who also determine the
policies and guidelines to be followed. Students will be admitted to the Combined B.A./M.A. program only by the invitation
and the approval of the department or program.
Programs of Study
The 4+1 option is currently available in the following departments and programs: English; French; German; history;
history of art; Latin American studies; mathematics; medicine,
health, and society; philosophy; political science; and psychology. Students are welcome to discuss the Combined B.A./M.A.
(4+1) option with any of these departments and programs.
Admissions Overview
The Combined B.A./M.A program allows Vanderbilt University students to study for both degrees typically, but not
necessarily, in the same department. Undergraduates with
strong academic records may apply for admission to the
program after the first semester of their junior year. Qualifying
students are normally accepted into the program in the second
semester of the junior year.
To apply for admission, students will first consult with
the Arts & Science Associate Deans’ Office (350 Buttrick Hall),
and then submit to the prospective graduate department or
program a “Petition to Apply to the Combined B.A./M.A. (4+1)
Degree Program” (available at as.vanderbilt.edu/academics/
specialdegree/4plus1.php), a statement of purpose, a formal
application to the Graduate School, a preliminary program
proposal, two letters of recommendation from Vanderbilt
faculty, and a current transcript. Application forms are available for download or can be completed online at vanderbilt.
edu/gradschool. GRE scores or other admissions requirements
may be specified by the prospective department. Admission to
the 4+1 option is highly selective. An accomplished academic
record, a demonstrated commitment to pursue graduate study,
and a strong endorsement from Vanderbilt faculty are key
elements to the successful applicant. Students will be provisionally accepted as graduate students, pending completion of
all undergraduate requirements. Graduate student status will
apply in the fifth year.
Advising
Prospective students should discuss with one of their advisers
general information on the program and how this program is
appropriate to their long-term goals. All students are encouraged to discuss their plans and goals with their undergraduate
pre-major and major adviser. Especially in those cases where
the intended graduate program differs from the undergraduate major, the student is further encouraged to seek advice
from the advisers in the graduate program, too.

A&S

60

Curriculum
Students in a 4+1 program must satisfy all requirements for
both degrees. Advanced Placement (AP) credits will often be
used toward satisfying general curriculum requirements, for a
maximum of 18 credit hours. The principal distinction between
this program and the standard graduate program is two-fold: (1)
students are allowed to take master’s courses while completing
the bachelor’s degree, and (2) students are thereby enabled to
complete both degrees within five years.
In order to complete the program in five years, students will
be expected to complete most, if not all, of the requirements
for their undergraduate degree by the end of the first semester
of the senior year. Until all baccalaureate requirements are
fulfilled, the student will follow College of Arts and Science
undergraduate policies and procedures. It is also suggested that
students begin taking graduate courses toward the master’s
degree in the second semester of the senior year. Most graduate
programs participating in this option have a non-thesis plan
of study requiring 30 graduate credit hours in addition to the
requirements for the undergraduate degree. An average load per
semester as a graduate student is 9–12 credit hours.

vanderbilt university

Scholarships and Financial Aid
Students who are receiving scholarships or other forms of
financial aid as a Vanderbilt undergraduate are advised that
such aid applies in most cases only toward the completion of
the bachelor’s degree or the first four years of their studies
(which may include their taking some graduate courses during
their senior year). Students wishing to pursue the 4+1 option
should seek support for their fifth year of study through
student loans and other financial aid.
For additional information, contact A&S Deans’ Office, 350
Buttrick Hall, or consult the website https://as.vanderbilt.edu/
academics/specialdegree/4plus1.php.

College of Arts and Science / Honors

61

Honors
Founder’s Medal
The Founder’s Medal, signifying first honors, was endowed
by Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt as one of his gifts to the
university. The recipient is named by the Dean after consideration of faculty recommendations and overall academic
achievements, as well as grade point averages of the year’s
highest ranking summa cum laude graduates.
Latin Honors Designation
Honors noted on diplomas and published in the Commencement program are earned as follows:
Summa Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average equals or exceeds that of the top 5 percent of the
previous year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Magna Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average equals or exceeds that of the next 8 percent of the
previous year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average equals
or exceeds that of the next 12 percent of the previous
year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Graduates who complete the requirements of the College
Scholars program are awarded “Honors in the College of Arts
and Science,” and this designation appears on their diplomas.
Candidates successfully completing departmental honors
programs are awarded honors or highest honors in their major
field, and this designation appears on their diploma.
College Scholars Program
Entering first-year students with outstanding academic
records and students who achieve academic distinction during
their first semester at Vanderbilt are invited to participate
in the College Scholars program. These students have the
exclusive opportunity to pursue advanced scholarly work in
honors seminars and enriched courses or independent-studies
projects. They may earn the designation “Honors in the College of Arts and Science” on their diplomas.
To earn the designation, College Scholars must accumulate
fifteen “honors points” by achieving the grade B or better in
approved courses and projects. A maximum of thirteen of
these honors points may be earned in honors seminars. Honors seminars in the humanities, natural sciences, and the social
sciences serve toward satisfaction of AXLE requirements in
these areas. For a complete description of how honors points
may be earned and a listing of honors seminars offered, see the
entry on Honors in alphabetical order under Courses of Study.
College Scholars are not required—although many will
choose—to earn honors in the College of Arts and Science; all,
however, may enroll in as many honors seminars as they want.
To remain in good standing in the program, students must
maintain a minimum grade point average of 3.000. Further
information on the College Scholars program and honors in
the College of Arts and Science may be obtained from Associate Dean Dan Morgan.

Departmental Honors
To encourage individual development and independent study in
a special field of interest, many departments and interdisciplinary programs of the College of Arts and Science offer honors
programs for selected, superior candidates. Students normally
begin departmental honors work in the junior year, but exceptions may be made in the case of outstanding seniors. To qualify
for consideration, students must have (a) attained a minimum
grade point average of 3.300 in all work previously taken for
credit and in the major, and (b) exhibited to the department(s)
and/or interdisciplinary program(s) other evidence of the student’s capacity for independent study. Some departments and
interdisciplinary programs require higher grade point averages
in all work previously taken for credit and/or in the major. Formal admission is by the director of honors study in the Office of
the Associate Deans after election by the department(s) and/or
interdisciplinary program(s) concerned.
Requirements vary somewhat from department to department (see descriptions in the appropriate department sections
of this catalog). Candidates are required to demonstrate some
degree of originality and maturity in the methods of independent investigation, analysis, and criticism, and skill in the
written presentation of independent work. This standard usually
requires a senior thesis but may be satisfied, in departments that
have gained approval of this procedure, by a series of briefer
critical papers.
Departmental honors work culminates in an examination
given in the second semester of the senior year. The examination shall be both oral and written except in departments where
honors students must take all courses required of standard
majors in addition to those required of honors students. These
departments have the option of making the examination
either oral or both oral and written. The examination shall be
conducted by a committee with a majority of examiners who
have not participated in the candidate’s honors work. Where
feasible, examiners from other institutions may be included.
The examination shall cover the thesis and specific fields of the
independent work and may, at the discretion of the department,
include all of the major work. Successful candidates are awarded
honors or highest honors in their field, and this designation
appears on their diplomas.
Dean’s List
The Dean’s List recognizes outstanding academic performance
in a semester. Students are named to the Dean’s List when they
earn a grade point average of at least 3.500 while carrying 12
or more graded credit hours, with no temporary or missing
grades in any course (credit or non-credit), and no grade of F.
A student must be in a degree-granting school.
Phi Beta Kappa
The Alpha Chapter of Phi Beta Kappa in the state of Tennessee
honors scholarly attainments in the liberal arts and sciences and
annually elects seniors and juniors to membership during the
spring semester.
Seniors who have completed at least 60 credit hours in the
College of Arts and Science and earned a cumulative grade
point average of 3.65 or higher are eligible for consideration,

A&S

62

as are juniors who have completed at least 70 credit hours at
Vanderbilt with a cumulative grade point average of at least
3.90. Juniors must have completed most AXLE requirements
by the end of their junior year. For calculating credit hours
and judging residence requirements, the chapter treats foreign
study programs in the same manner as does the College of Arts
and Science.
Attainment of the minimum required grade point average
does not guarantee election. Membership in Phi Beta Kappa
is based on a demonstration of scholarly achievements, broad
cultural interests, and high moral character. The scholarly
work must emphasize liberal rather than applied or professional studies. As a guideline, for seniors at least 90 credit
hours must qualify as liberal. Grades earned in applied (vocational) or professional course work are not counted in computing the grade point average. The breadth of a candidate’s
program, as shown by the number and variety of courses taken
outside the major, is also considered.
Phi Beta Kappa has long emphasized the importance of
mathematics and foreign language in a liberal education. In
keeping with this tradition, the chapter considers only those
students who have demonstrated proficiency in these areas
beyond the AXLE graduation requirements. Proficiency in
reading, writing, and speaking a foreign language is typically
demonstrated by passing a course in a language at a level at
least one semester beyond the AXLE requirements. Courses
must be taken on a graded rather than a P/F basis. The foreign
language requirement may be satisfied with College Board SAT
Subject, Advanced Placement, International Baccalaureate, or
Tennessee Foreign Language Institute test scores.
Mathematics proficiency may be demonstrated by completing wo semesters of calculus or one semester of calculus
and one semester of statistics. Courses must be taken on a
graded rather than a P/F basis. The mathematics requirement
may be satisfied with Advanced Placement, International Baccalaureate, or A-Level exam credit, but not College Board SAT
Subject test scores.
In no event may the total number of persons elected from
any senior class exceed 10 percent of the class, and from any
junior class exceed six persons. Eligible juniors who are not
elected are reconsidered for membership in their senior year.
Refer to the chapter website my.vanderbilt.edu/phibetakappa
for additional information and detailed eligibility criteria.
Honor Societies for First-Year Students
First-year students who earn a grade point average of 3.500 or
better for their first semester are eligible for membership in the
Vanderbilt chapters of Phi Eta Sigma and Alpha Lambda Delta.
Other Awards and Prizes
MORRIS H. BERNSTEIN JR. PRIZE IN LATIN DECLAMATION. Established in 1983 by William H. Bernstein (B.A. 1983) in memory of his father
(B.A. 1943, M.D. 1946). Awarded after a competition, open to any undergraduate who has studied two semesters of Latin, in which participants
deliver from memory Latin passages selected to reflect classical ideals.
FOUNDER’S MEDAL FOR ORATORY. Awarded to the senior who has
demonstrated the highest standard in public speaking.
FRENCH GOVERNMENT PRIZES. Awarded for excellence in French
studies.
EDWIN S. GARDNER MEMORIAL PRIZE FOR EXCELLENCE IN
FRENCH. Awarded to a graduating senior who majored in French.
ALEXANDER HEARD AWARD. Presented annually to the outstanding senior political science major.

vanderbilt university
RICHARD J. LARSEN AWARD FOR ACHIEVEMENT IN UNDERGRADUATE MATHEMATICS. Established in 2005 to honor the commitment to undergraduate education of Richard J. Larsen, member of the faculty from
1970 to 2005. Presented each spring to the senior math major judged by
the faculty to have excelled in all aspects of undergraduate mathematics.
AVERY LEISERSON AWARD. Presented for the best research paper or
essay written by an undergraduate in a political science course.
MERRILL MOORE AWARD. Endowed in 1961 by Mrs. Merrill Moore,
Squantum, Massachusetts, in memory of her husband. Presented to a
graduating senior or a student entering the junior or senior class, selected
by the Department of English on the basis of “literary promise and the
psychological or practical usefulness of the award” to the student.
DANA W. NANCE PRIZE FOR EXCELLENCE IN A PREMEDICAL CURRICULUM. Endowed in 1985 by the family and friends of Dana W. Nance
(B.A. 1925, M.D. 1929). Awarded annually to a student who has demonstrated the perseverance to succeed in a premedical curriculum and who
embodies the attributes of a caring physician.
JUM C. NUNNALLY AWARD. Established in 1987 in memory of this professor of psychology from 1960 to 1982. Presented to a graduating senior
in the honors program of the Department of Psychology for the best research project.
DONALD E. PEARSON AWARD. Presented annually to a graduating senior in chemistry adjudged the most distinguished in undergraduate research in chemistry.
PHI BETA KAPPA FRESHMAN SEMINAR AWARD. Awarded annually to
students who have done outstanding creative work in freshman seminars.
AWARD FOR OUTSTANDING RESEARCH IN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY.
Presented to a senior in molecular biology for outstanding research performed as part of the major program in molecular biology.
OUTSTANDING SENIOR IN CHEMISTRY AWARD. Presented annually to
that graduating senior in chemistry who, in the opinion of the faculty of the
Department of Chemistry, shows most promise of an outstanding career.
HENRY LEE SWINT PRIZE. Awarded since 1978 for the best essay in
history.
D. STANLEY AND ANN T. TARBELL PRIZE IN ORGANIC CHEMISTRY.
Awarded annually to a graduating senior who has excelled in organic
chemistry by earning the highest grades in courses or performing outstanding research in organic chemistry.
UNDERWOOD MEMORIAL AWARD. Endowed in 1961 by the late Newton Underwood in memory of his father, Judge Emory Marvin Underwood,
long-time member of the Board of Trust. The cash award is given to the
most deserving and most promising graduating senior or graduate student in physics.
SUSAN FORD WILTSHIRE PRIZE. Cosponsored by the Women’s and
Gender Studies program and the Women’s Faculty Organization, this
award is given annually for the best undergraduate essay that deals with
gender issues.
KATHARINE B. WOODWARD PRIZE. Awarded since 1943 and endowed
in 1962 by Miss Katharine B. Woodward, Class of 1919, for excellence in
Spanish studies.
MARGARET STONEWALL WOOLDRIDGE HAMBLET AWARD. Endowed
in 1983 by Clement H. Hamblet in memory of his late wife, who began
her art studies at Peabody College. The award is given to a graduating
student of outstanding merit in studio art to enable the pursuit of his or
her creative development through one year of extensive travel and further
studies in studio art.

College of Arts and Science / Academic Regulations

63

Academic Regulations
Honor System
All academic work at Vanderbilt is done under the Honor
System. (See the chapter on Life at Vanderbilt.)
Class Attendance
Students are expected to attend all scheduled meetings of
classes in which they are enrolled; they have an obligation to
contribute to the academic performance of all students by full
participation in the work of each class. At the beginning of the
semester, instructors explain the policy regarding absences in
each of their classes, and thereafter they report to the Office
of the Associate Deans of the College of Arts and Science the
name of any student whose achievement in a course is being
adversely affected by excessive absences. In such cases an associate dean, in consultation with the instructor, takes appropriate action, which may include dropping the student from the
class; students dropped after the deadline for withdrawal (see
Period for Withdrawal) receive the grade F. Class attendance
may be specified as a factor in determining the final grade in a
course, and it cannot fail to influence the grade even when it is
not considered explicitly.
The last day before and the first day after official holidays
are considered to be the same as any other day on which
classes are scheduled. Assignments are made for classes scheduled on these days, and tests may be given in them. Students
should take this fact into account in making travel plans.
The faculty of the College of Arts and Science recognizes
that occasions arise during the academic year that merit the
excused absence of a student from a scheduled class or laboratory during which an examination, quiz, or other graded
exercise is given. Examples include participation in sponsored university activities (e.g., debate team, varsity sports),
observance of officially designated religious holidays, serious
personal problems (e.g., serious illness, death of a member
of the student’s family), and matters relating to the student’s
academic training (e.g., graduate or professional school
interviews). While determination of the merit of a case is left
primarily to the discretion of the individual instructor, conflicts arising from personal travel plans or social obligations
do not qualify as excused absences. Except in unusual circumstances, the Office of the Associate Deans does not grant
excused absences for students. For more information please
visit https://as.vanderbilt.edu/academics/policies/absences.php.
The primary determination of whether a student’s absence
from class occurs for a reason that warrants rescheduling a
graded exercise for that student is left to the judgment of the
individual instructor. A standard of reasonableness should
apply in making such judgments.
Except in cases of true emergency, student petitions for
making up missed graded exercises must be made prior to
the missed class, preferably at the beginning of the semester
or at the earliest time thereafter when the need to be absent is
known to the student. Faculty members retain discretion in
the form and timing of makeup exercises or in devising other
strategies for accommodating students.
The faculty of the College of Arts and Science authorizes
the Office of the Dean to resolve through arbitration any cases

that cannot be directly resolved between students and their
instructors.
Classroom Recording Policy
The use of technologies for audio and video recording of
lectures and other classroom activities is allowed only with the
express permission of the instructor. In cases where recordings are allowed, such content is restricted to personal use
only unless permission is expressly granted in writing by the
instructor and by other classroom participants, including
other students. Personal use is defined as use by an individual
student for the purpose of studying or completing course
assignments. When students have permission for personal use
of recordings, they must still obtain written permission from
the instructor to share recordings with others.
For students registered with EAD and who have been
approved for audio and/or video recording of lectures and other
classroom activities as a reasonable accommodation, applicable
federal law requires instructors to permit those recordings. Such
recordings are also limited to personal use, except with permission of the instructor and other students in the class.

Course Registrations
Normal Course Load
Each semester, regular tuition is charged on the basis of a normal course load of 12 to 18 semester hours. No more than 18 or
fewer than 12 credit hours may be taken in any one semester
without authorization of the Administrative Committee or an
associate dean in 350 Buttrick Hall. (There is an extra charge
for more than 18 credit hours at the current hourly rate.)
First-year students may not take more than 18 credit hours in
a semester.
Students permitted to take fewer than 12 credit hours
are placed on probation, unless their light load is necessary
because of outside employment or illness. During the summer session, there is no minimum course load. Summer loads
exceeding 14 credit hours must be authorized by an associate
dean in 350 Buttrick Hall.
Credit hours are semester hours; e.g., a three-hour course carries credit of 3 semester hours. One semester credit hour represents at least three hours of academic work per week, on average,
for one semester. Academic work includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, lectures, laboratory work, homework, research, class
readings, independent study, internships, practica, studio work,
recitals, practicing, rehearsing, and recitations. Some Vanderbilt
courses may have requirements that exceed this definition.
A student must be enrolled in a minimum of 12 credit hours
to be classified as a full-time student.
Auditing
Regularly enrolled Arts and Science students who want to
audit courses in any of the undergraduate schools of the
university must obtain the written consent of the instructor
to attend the class but do not register for the course for credit.
Forms are available from the Office of Academic Services in

A&S

64

each school. No permanent record is kept of the audit. Regular
students may audit one class each semester.
Taking Courses for No-Credit
Students may want to take elsewhere in the university courses
that are not creditable toward the bachelor’s degree. They may
do so on a no-credit basis, attending classes, doing all the work
of the course, and receiving a grade that is recorded on the transcript with a notation that it does not count toward the degree.
No-credit courses count in computation of the student’s
academic load and in computation of tuition, but not in computation of the grade point average. They also do not count
toward the attainment of class standing.
Taking Courses for P/F Credit
Students may elect to take a limited number of courses on
a Pass/Fail (P/F) basis. To enroll for a course on a Pass/Fail
basis, students must have completed at least two semesters at
Vanderbilt, must have achieved at least sophomore standing,
and must not be on academic probation.
No more than 18 credit hours graded P may be counted
toward the degree, and no more than one course per term may
be taken P/F.
The P/F option does not apply to courses in the following
categories:
1. Courses counted toward AXLE requirements;
2. Courses in the major field(s), other courses that may be
counted toward the major(s), or courses required for the
major(s);
3. For students with a defined interdisciplinary major,
courses that are required for the major or that are eligible
to count toward the major;
4. For students with an individually designed interdisciplinary major, courses listed in the student’s plan of study;
5. For students planning an optional minor, courses in the
minor field or those eligible to count toward an interdisciplinary minor;
6. Courses that have been specifically excluded from the P/F
option;
7. Courses taken previously.
8. Minimum 12 graded credit hours required.
9. A graduating senior who has permission to take fewer than
12 credit hours on a graded basis may take one course on a
P/F basis in addition to the courses required for graduation.
If the student does not graduate at the end of that semester,
the P grade is automatically converted to the grade actually
earned.
Students may register for grading on a Pass/Fail basis until
the close of the Change Period at the end of the second week
of classes. Students may change from Pass/Fail to graded
status until the deadline date for withdrawing from a course
that is published in the Academic Calendar.
Those electing the Pass/Fail option must meet all course
requirements (e.g. reports, papers, examinations, attendance,
etc.) and are graded in the normal way. Instructors are not
informed of the names of students enrolled on a Pass/Fail
basis. At the end of the semester, a regular grade is submitted
for the student enrolled under the P/F option. Any grade of
D– or above is converted in the Student Records System to a

vanderbilt university

P, while an F will be recorded if a student enrolled under this
option fails the course. The P grade is not counted in the grade
point average nor used in the determination of honors. The
grade of F earned under the Pass/Fail option is included in the
calculation of the grade point average.
The grade for a class will be converted from P to the
recorded letter grade if a student later declares a major or
minor toward which that class counts. The recorded letter
grade will be included in both the overall and the major or
minor grade point average.
Undergraduate Enrollment in Graduate Courses
In the 4-digit course numbering system initiated in Fall 2015,
some courses may enroll undergraduate and graduate students
simultaneously. Typically, there is a 3000- or 4000-level course
for undergraduates and a matching 5000-level course for graduate students. Undergraduate students may enroll in the 3000- or
4000-level course of these pairs without special approval.
A qualified Vanderbilt University senior undergraduate may
enroll in courses approved for graduate credit (those numbered
5000 and higher) and receive credit that, upon the student’s
admission to the Vanderbilt Graduate School, may be applicable toward a graduate degree. Vanderbilt cannot guarantee
that another graduate school will grant credit for such courses.
The principles governing this option are as follows:
1. Work taken under this option is limited to those courses
approved for graduate credit (those numbered 5000 and
higher) and listed as such in the Graduate School catalog,
excluding thesis and dissertation research courses and
similar individual research and readings courses. Courses
approved for professional credit (i.e., many courses in the
Divinity School, Law School, School of Medicine, School of
Nursing, and Owen Graduate School of Management) may
not be taken as part of this option.
2. The student must, at the time of registration, have a 3.00
average in all prior work to be counted toward the bachelor’s degree, or a 3.00 average in all prior work to be
counted toward the undergraduate major, or a 3.00 average
in the preceding two semesters.
3. The total course load, including both graduate and undergraduate courses, must not exceed 15 credit hours in any
semester.
4. No undergraduate student may enroll in more than one
graduate course in any semester.
5. A registration form for undergraduate Arts and Science
students wishing to exercise this option is available in the
College of Arts and Science Associate Deans’ Office. The
interested student must use this form to obtain the written
approval of the following:
a) the academic adviser,
b) the instructor of the course,
c) and the director of graduate studies of the department
or program.

Reserving Credit for Graduate School
1. Arts and Science students who are interested in reserving
the credit earned in a graduate course (those numbered
5000 and higher) should consult with the Graduate School

College of Arts and Science / Academic Regulations

before attempting to register for graduate courses under
this option.
2. The work must be in excess of that required for the bachelor’s degree.
3. All of the above criteria apply under this option.
4. Students must declare their intention to reserve this credit
on the registration form.
5. Permission for Vanderbilt undergraduates to enroll in
graduate courses does not constitute a commitment on the
part of any department to accept the student as a graduate
student in the future.
6. An undergraduate student exercising this option is treated
as a graduate student with regard to class requirements and
grading standards.

65

The policy of grade replacement applies when all of the
conditions below are met.
1. A previously passed course is repeated within one year or
(for courses not offered within a year) the first time it is
offered. Passed courses may be repeated only once. Failed
courses may be repeated at any time and any number of
times, with the exception of First-Year Writing Seminars
(see #2 below).
2. Exactly the same course (same department and course
number) is completed. For First-Year Writing Seminars,
it must be the same department and section number, but
FYWS cannot be repeated after completion of the second
semester in residence. In addition, a very small number of
differently numbered courses as approved by the faculty may
be substituted under this policy. These are designated in the
departmental course listings.

Independent Study and Directed Study Courses
Independent study and directed study courses are intended
primarily for students in their junior and senior years. Students
may not take an independent study or directed study course
that duplicates a regular course being offered in the same
semester. Juniors or seniors who wish to take independent study
or directed study courses must use the following procedure:

4. The course is not one in independent study or directed study.

1. Obtain permission to enroll from the instructor of their
choice. Consult the instructor prior to the course request
period of registration for the semester in which the study is
to be undertaken.

6. A W course is taken as repeat credit for a non-Writing
version of the same course that was previously passed. The
student earns credit for the writing requirement.

2. Register for the course through the appropriate department.
3. Make a written study plan detailing the nature of the
project and the amount of credit and have it approved by
the instructor and the department chair (or the chair’s
designee) by the tenth day after classes begin.
Students who have not met these requirements are
reported on the tenth-day enrollment report as “registered but
not attending” and are dropped from the course.
Students may not repeat independent study or directed
study courses for grade replacement. Independent study
courses in other schools approved by the College Curriculum
Committee may be taken for credit if the project is approved
by the Committee on Individual Programs.
Duplication of Course Content
It is the responsibility of the individual student to avoid
duplication in whole or in part of the content of any course
counting toward the degree. Such duplication may result in
the withdrawal of credit.

Repeated Courses
Most courses offered in the College of Arts and Science
may be repeated. If a course was failed the last time it was
taken, credit is awarded when the course is repeated with
a passing grade. If a course was previously passed, no new
credit is earned. If a course previously passed is repeated and
failed, credit originally earned for it is lost. In any case all
grades earned are shown on the transcript. Under conditions
explained below, the most recent grade in a course replaces
the previous grade in determining credit, in computing the
grade point average, and in verifying the completion of degree
requirements and progress toward the degree.

3. The course is repeated on a regularly graded basis. This
limitation applies even if the course was originally taken on
a P/F basis.
5. A non-W course is taken as repeat credit for a Writing
version of the same course that was previously passed. The
student loses credit for the writing requirement.

7. Certain courses (e.g., ensemble, performance instruction,
and independent study) are designated as repeatable as
they contain evolving or iteratively new content. These
courses may be taken multiple times for credit. If a course
can be repeated, the number of credit hours allowable per
semester will be included in the course description.
In most instances, enrollment in a course similar to one
already completed but with a different course number will
result in the award of no credit for the second course and will
have no effect on the grade point average.
Courses taken in the College of Arts and Science may not
be repeated elsewhere for grade replacement; nor may courses
taken elsewhere be repeated in the College of Arts and Science
for grade replacement.
Students are cautioned that while repeating for grade
replacement a course previously passed may improve their
cumulative grade point average, it may also lead to a problem
in meeting minimum credit hours requirements for class
standing because no new credit is earned.
The Registration Process
A period is designated in each semester during which continuing students, after consultation with their advisers, register for
work to be taken during the next term. The student’s adviser
must release the advising hold in YES before the student can
register.
Students are asked to plan their immediate and long-range
educational programs with their faculty advisers before registering and to consult their advisers when they make changes in
their registration.
Students not meeting specified tuition payment deadlines
are not permitted to register. See the chapter on Financial
Information for details.

A&S

66

Before registering, students should check their own records
carefully with respect to the following items:
1. AXLE requirements;
2. Major requirements;
3. Requirements of any optional minor(s) sought;
4. Course prerequisites.

Period for Withdrawal or Change from P/F Status
After the Change Period, and extending to the end of the eighth
week of classes, a student may withdraw from a course with
approval from the student’s adviser. Under certain conditions,
withdrawal may also require approval from an associate dean
in 350 Buttrick Hall. During the same period students may
change their status from P/F to regularly graded—but not vice
versa—in a course.
These changes must be made with a Change of Course form,
which is available online and which the student must submit to
the Office of Academic Services in Arts and Science. After the
end of the eighth week, withdrawal is possible only in the most
extraordinary circumstances, such as illness or unusual personal
or family problems, and in all cases must be approved by the
Administrative Committee. After the end of the eighth week,
change from P/F to regularly graded status is not permitted.
Students who withdraw from a course after the change
period receive the grade W (withdrawal). This grade is not
used in the computation of the grade point average or class
rank. A student who defaults in a course without dropping or
withdrawing from it receives the grade F.

Minimum Graded Credit Hours
A course may not be dropped without authorization of the
Administrative Committee or an associate dean if the student
is left with a course load of fewer than 12 credit hours on a
regularly graded basis.
Mid-Semester Progress Reports
At the end of the seventh week of each semester, instructors
assess the progress of all students in their classes and report
those whose work at that point is deficient or whose work is
being harmed by excessive absences. Grades to be reported are
C–, D+, D, D–, F, and I (for incomplete, meaning that some
work due by that point has not been submitted). Instructors
may combine with one of these grades or assign separately a
notation of excessive absences from a class. Reports of these
deficiencies are posted to students’ Access to Academic Information online summary. Grades given at mid-semester do not
become part of the permanent record but are intended to warn
students about performance judged unsatisfactory.
Examinations
Each department establishes procedures for evaluating student
performance, and normally the method of evaluation is the
responsibility of the course instructor. At the beginning of
the semester instructors should clearly state the evaluation
procedures, including types of examinations, to be used in
their courses. Students should have adequate opportunity during the semester to demonstrate their knowledge of the subject
matter and should be given an indication of their progress in
the course prior to the deadline for dropping courses. Instructors are cautioned against placing excessive weight on the final
examination when determining a student’s grade in a course.

vanderbilt university

Dead Week
No examinations of any type—including quizzes, hour examinations, and portions of final examinations—are allowed
during the last week of classes; papers and in-class presentations are permitted during dead week. The Administrative
Committee may grant special permission to the instructor in
charge of a course to give laboratory examinations during the
last regular laboratory period of the last week of classes. The
last week of classes is defined as the last seven calendar days
preceding the end of classes. If, for example, classes end on
Tuesday, then the “dead week” begins the preceding Wednesday and lasts through Tuesday. Students should notify the
Office of the Associate Deans of any violation.

Final Examinations
The primary and alternate final examination schedules issued
each semester allow two hours for a final examination in each
course. Each in-class final examination must be given at the
time indicated on the primary schedule. The alternate schedule is used only if the instructor decides to give an in-class
examination at two times. The final examination period lasts
for about a week and a half.
Alternatives to the standard in-class final examination are
permitted at the instructor’s discretion. Some examples are
take-home examinations, oral examinations, and term papers;
there need not be a final examination if adequate evaluation
procedures have been used during the term. A take-home
or oral examination should make approximately the same
demand on a student’s time as an in-class examination and
should be conducted during the final examination period. A
take-home examination must be distributed at the last regular
class meeting and must be completed by either the primary or
the alternate examination date, whichever is later.
All examinations are conducted under the Honor System.
The instructor’s record of grades given during a course
and any final examination papers not returned to students
must be kept on file by the instructor for the first month of the
semester following the conclusion of the course. For spring
semester and summer session courses, this rule means the first
month of the fall semester.
Monitoring these regulations is the responsibility of the
departments, under the supervision of the Office of the Associate Deans. Variations from the regulations—such as changing
the time of an in-class final examination for an entire class—are
allowed only on approval of the Administrative Committee.

Comprehensive Examination
Any department or interdisciplinary program may require a
comprehensive examination of its major students as a condition of graduation.

Senior Re-examination
A candidate for graduation who fails not more than one course
in the final semester may be allowed one re-examination,
provided the course failed prevents the student’s graduation,
and provided the student could pass the course by passing a
re-examination. Certain courses may be excluded from reexamination. The re-examination must be requested through
the Office of the Associate Deans, and if approved, it is given
immediately after the close of the last semester of the student’s
senior year. A student who passes the re-examination will

College of Arts and Science / Academic Regulations

receive a D– in the course. The terms and administration of
senior re-examination are the responsibility of the school that
offers the course.

Credit by Examination
In certain circumstances, students may be awarded course credit
by departmental examination. (This procedure is distinct from
the award of credit through the College Board Advanced Placement Tests taken prior to the student’s first enrollment.)
Students who wish to earn credit by departmental examination should consult the Office of Academic Services in Arts and
Science concerning procedures. To be eligible, students must be
carrying a minimum of 12 credit hours and be in good standing.
Students must obtain the approval of the chair of the department that is to give the examination and the instructor designated by the chair. Students may earn up to 18 hours of credit
by any combination of credit through advanced placement
examinations and credit by departmental examination. Students
may earn up to 8 hours of credit by examination in any one
department. Students may attempt to obtain credit by examination no more than twice in one semester, no more than once
in one course in one semester, and no more than twice in one
course. Students may not repeat a course for grade replacement
under the credit by examination procedures. Credits earned by
credit by examination may not be counted toward AXLE.
Credit hours and grade are awarded on the basis of the
grade earned on the examination, subject to the policy of
the department awarding credit. Students have the option of
refusing to accept the credit hours and grade after learning the
results of the examination.
Students enrolled for at least 12 credit hours are not
charged extra tuition for hours earned through credit by
examination, so long as the amount of credit falls within the
allowable limits of an 18-hour tuition load, including nocredit courses and courses dropped after the Change Period.
Students in this category must pay a $50 fee for the cost of
constructing, administering, and grading the examination.
Since this cost has already been incurred, students who refuse
the credit hours and grade are charged the $50 fee nevertheless.
Full-time students with a tuition load exceeding 18 credit
hours and students taking fewer than 12 credit hours pay
tuition at the regular rate with no additional fee.

Grades and Credit
Grade Reports
Students have access to their grade reports on the Academic
Record in YES. Notifications are sent to students in their last
two semesters, showing total credit hours, grade point average, and degree requirements still to be met. Students should
examine their Degree Audit reports carefully and discuss them
with their faculty advisers. Any errors should be reported
immediately to the Office of Academic Services in Arts and
Science (see also Change of Grade).
Grading System
A:
B:
C:
D:
F:

excellent
good
satisfactory
minimum pass work
failure

67

Under certain circumstances the following grades may be
awarded:
W:
P:
M:
I:
MI:
IP:

withdrawal
(see P/F Course Provision)
absent from final examination
incomplete in some requirement other than final examination
absent from final examination and incomplete work
first semester grade for two-semester Honors sequence

Plus and minus modifiers may be associated with letter
grades A through D as shown in the table below. Grade point
averages are calculated using indicated grade point values.

Defined Grades with Corresponding Grade Points Per
Credit Hour
A
A–
B+
B
B–
C+

=
=
=
=
=
=

4.0
3.7
3.3
3.0
2.7
2.3

C
C–
D+
D
D–
F

=
=
=
=
=
=

2.0
1.7
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.0

Grade Point Average
A student’s grade point average is obtained by dividing the
quality points earned by the credit hours for which the student
has registered, excluding courses taken for no credit, those
from which the student has officially withdrawn (see Withdrawal Period under Registration above), and those completed
with the grade P.
In no case is the grade point average affected by transfer
credit. No course at another institution in which a grade below
C– was received, or which was taken on a Pass/Fail basis, is
credited toward the degrees awarded by the College of Arts and
Science.
Temporary Grades
Temporary grades are placeholders that are assigned under
defined circumstances with a specified deadline by which they
will be replaced with a permanent grade. Temporary grades
are not calculated in the GPA, but a student who receives a
temporary grade is ineligible for the Dean’s List. Students cannot graduate with any temporary grades.

M: Missing a Final Examination
The grade M is given to a student who misses a final examination and is not known to have defaulted in the course, unless
the student could not have passed the course even with the final
examination, in which case the grade F is given. The course
grade of a student known to have defaulted on a final examination is computed on the basis of a score of zero for the final
examination. It is the responsibility of the student who misses
a final examination to present an excuse to the associate dean
immediately. If the excuse is considered adequate, the grade M
is authorized.
A student who secures authorization for an absence at the
proper time is obliged to take a makeup examination during
the first full week after the Change Period of the next semester,
provided the student is in residence. It is the student’s responsibility to contact the Office of the Associate Deans (350 Buttrick
Hall) before the second day of classes to schedule the makeup.
If the student is not in residence, the grade M must be removed
by a makeup examination given within a maximum period of
one year from the date of the missed examination and during
one of the regular makeup examination periods. If the student

A&S

68

fails to take the makeup examination within the prescribed time,
the M grade will be replaced by a default grade submitted by the
instructor when the M is assigned.

I: Incomplete
The grade of I is given only under extenuating circumstances
and only when a significant body of satisfactory work has
been completed in a course. The I is not intended as a replacement for a failing grade, nor should it be assigned if a student
simply misses the final examination. The grade of M is used
for the latter purpose. The grade for a student who misses a
final examination and whose work is also incomplete in other
respects is reported as MI. The request for an I is generally
initiated by the student but must be approved and assigned
by the instructor. When assigning an Incomplete, the instructor specifies (a) a deadline by which the I must be resolved
and replaced by a permanent grade and (b) a default course
grade that counts the missing work as zero. The deadline may
be no later than the end of the next regular semester. The
Incomplete can be extended beyond the next semester only if
an associate dean determines that an extension is warranted. If
the required work is submitted by the deadline for removing
the Incomplete, the I will be replaced by the grade earned. If
the work is not completed by the deadline, the default grade
will become the permanent grade for the course.

MI: Missing a Final Examination and Other Work
The grade for a student who misses a final examination and
whose work is also incomplete in other respects is reported as
MI. This grade may not be turned in without prior authorization by an associate dean. It is the student’s responsibility to
contact the Office of the Associate Deans (350 Buttrick Hall)
to request permission to take a makeup examination and to
arrange for the submission of the missing work.

Makeup Examinations
For students who receive the authorized grade M, the Office
of the Associate Deans may arrange makeup examinations
during the next semester, although it is preferable for the professor to administer the make-up examination. The makeup
examination period is the first full week after the Change
Period of each semester. The Administrative Committee may
on occasion authorize a makeup examination at some time
other than the makeup period for a particular student.

F: Failure
The grade F indicates failure. All F’s are counted in the computation of grade point averages, except when a course is repeated
and is subsequently passed. In this case the latest grade is used
for computation of the grade point average (but the grade
originally earned is not removed from the transcript). A course
in which the grade F is received must be repeated as a regular
course if credit is to be given. It may not be repeated as a course
in independent or directed study, under the procedures for
credit by examination, or on a P/F basis.
Change of Grade
A grade reported and recorded in the Office of the University
Registrar may be changed only upon written request of the
instructor with the approval of the Administrative Committee.

vanderbilt university

The committee will approve such a change only on certification
that the original report was in error.
Transfer Credit
It is the student’s responsibility to provide all of the information needed by the College of Arts and Science to assess the
program for which transfer of credit is requested. Work presented for transfer must be from an accredited college and is
subject to evaluation in light of the degree requirements of the
College of Arts and Science. Students seeking transfer credit
for work at nonaccredited institutions will be considered
individually. Correspondence courses will not be considered
for transfer credit.
Work transferred to Vanderbilt from another institution will not carry with it a grade point average. No course
in which a grade below C– was received, or which was taken
on a Pass/Fail basis, will be credited toward a degree offered
by the College of Arts and Science. The question of credit in
the College of Arts and Science for previous work done at
another institution must be settled in advance of the student’s
first registration. Credit for previous work will not be added
to the student’s record after matriculation. Credit will not be
awarded for internships.
Transfer students must spend at least four full semesters,
including the last two semesters, enrolled in the College of
Arts and Science. They must earn at least 60 credit hours and
complete at least one writing course in fulfillment of the writing
requirement while so enrolled.
Residence Requirement
A minimum of four normal semesters (at least 60 credit
hours), including the last two semesters (at least 30 credit
hours), must be spent in residence in the College of Arts and
Science unless an exception is made by the Administrative
Committee. Students transferring from other schools of the
university must spend the last year (at least 30 credit hours) in
residence in the College of Arts and Science.
Summer Work at Another Institution
Students enrolled in the College of Arts and Science may
receive transfer credit for a maximum of two courses taken
during summers at another four-year, fully accredited institution. To qualify for such credit, the student must be in good
standing and must obtain authorization from an associate
dean and the appropriate department in advance of taking the
course. Such courses cannot fulfill AXLE requirements, count
as part of the last 30 credit hours in residence, duplicate a
course taken previously, or be taken on a Pass/Fail or similar
basis. Credit will not be awarded for internships.
Semester Work at Another Institution
Students who wish to receive transfer credit for a semester of
work at another institution must receive approval in advance
from the Committee on Individual Programs. To qualify for
such credit, the student must be in good standing and must
present to the committee a plan that makes clear the educational rationale for such work, the ways in which it supplements
the Vanderbilt curriculum, and the equivalence of standards
to those at Vanderbilt. Approval of the overall plan by this
committee must be followed by approval of specific courses by
the student’s adviser, the appropriate department in the College
of Arts and Science, and the Office of Academic Services in Arts
and Science. Such courses cannot fulfill AXLE requirements,

College of Arts and Science / Academic Regulations

count as part of the last 30 credit hours in residence, duplicate
a course taken previously, or be taken on a Pass/Fail or similar
basis. Credit will not be awarded for internships.
Senior-in-Absentia
A student who wishes to earn a baccalaureate degree in the College of Arts and Science in absentia must have (a) completed the
AXLE requirements and all major requirements; (b) earned at
least 105 credit hours and a grade point average of 2.000 with at
least 60 credit hours earned in a minimum of four semesters of
residence in the College of Arts and Science; (c) been accepted
at a professional or graduate school where, during the first
year, the remaining credit hours needed for graduation can be
earned; and (d) obtained the approval of the major department
and an associate dean of the College of Arts and Science. Students who have completed fewer than 105 credit hours may petition the Administrative Committee for special consideration.
The limitation on credit hours outside the College of Arts
and Science applies to all bachelor of arts candidates.
Students in the senior-in-absentia program pay a minimum semester tuition charge to the College of Arts and Science (see Financial Information).
Student Leave of Absence
A student desiring a leave of absence should obtain application
forms and instructions from the Office of the Associate Deans
of the College of Arts and Science. All students are eligible,
provided they have not been dropped by the university and are
not dropped at the end of the semester during which application is made. But students may take a leave no more than twice
during their career in the College of Arts and Science.
Leaves are granted for one semester or for a year. Applications should be completed before the end of the fall semester
for a leave of absence during the spring semester, and before
August 15 for a leave of absence during the fall semester (or for
the academic year). If the leave is approved, the student must
keep the Office of the University Registrar informed of any
change of address while on leave.
A student who takes a medical leave after mid-semester
is expected to be on leave for the following regular semester
as well. A student who plans to return from medical leave
must submit appropriate documentation to the Office of the
Associate Deans and the Center for Student Wellbeing at least
forty-five days before the first day of class.
A student who seeks to transfer to Vanderbilt credit earned
elsewhere while on leave of absence must obtain permission in
advance from the Committee on Individual Programs. Applications for leaves of this type must be filed with the committee
at least one month before the close of the preceding semester.
Registration information is emailed to students on leave of
absence. A student failing to register at the conclusion of the
stated leave will be withdrawn from the university and must
apply for readmission.
Withdrawal from the University
Students proposing to withdraw from the university during a
regular term must report to the Office of the Associate Deans
of the College of Arts and Science to initiate proper clearance
procedures. If withdrawal from the university is officially
authorized, the student will receive withdrawal grades on the
same basis as a student withdrawing from a particular course
or courses. (See the section on Period for Withdrawal under
Registration above.)

69

Change of Address
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed
of their correct mailing addresses, both school and home.
They should notify the university, through the Office of the
University Registrar, online or in writing, of any address
changes as soon as possible. They are provided an opportunity
to review address information at registration. The university
will consider notices and other information delivered if mailed
to the address on file in the Office of the University Registrar.

Academic Discipline
The College of Arts and Science requires each student to maintain an academic record that will permit graduation according
to a specified schedule. Students are considered to fall short of
the expected rate of progress when
1. They pass fewer than 12 credit hours in a semester or have a
semester grade point average lower than 1.500; or
2. In a summer they take 12 or more credit hours but pass
fewer than 12 credit hours or earn a grade point average
lower than 1.500; or
3. They fail to achieve sophomore, junior, or senior standing
within the time allowed; or
4. They accumulate more than two probations after the freshman year, in which case they will normally be dropped
from the university; or
5. As first-semester freshmen they pass fewer than two
courses or earn a semester grade point average lower than
1.000, in which case they may be required to take a probationary leave of absence; or
6. As first-semester freshmen they earn fewer than 9 credit
hours or a semester grade point average lower than 1.500,
in which case they may be offered a choice (see Semester
Requirements below).
Any student who falls somewhat short of the prescribed
levels of academic achievement is normally placed on probation.
Any student who fails by a wide margin to reach these levels or
who has been placed on probation more than once is reviewed
by the Administrative Committee, and may be dropped from
the university without having previously been placed on academic probation. The committee considers each case within the
framework of the guidelines outlined below and may take any of
several actions, among which are the following:
1. The student may be placed on probation;
2. The student may be advised to take a leave of absence or to
withdraw from the university;
3. The student may be required to take a leave of absence;
4. The student may be dropped from the university.
Semester Requirements
Full-time students are expected to earn each semester at least
12 credit hours and a minimum grade point average of 1.500.
Students who fall short of these levels are normally placed on
probation. Students are removed from probation after earning
at least 12 credit hours and a semester grade point average of
1.500 or better, assuming they have fulfilled the requirements
for class standing stated below.

A&S

70

First-year students who pass fewer than two regular
courses in their first regular semester or who earn a semester
grade point average lower than 1.000 have so seriously compromised their academic standing that they may be required
to take a probationary leave of absence until the beginning of
the following fall semester.
First-year students who earn fewer than 9 credit hours or
a grade point average lower than 1.500 in the fall may, at the
discretion of the Administrative Committee, choose a probationary leave for the spring and return the next fall with two
semesters in which to qualify for sophomore standing.
A student on probationary leave may not earn credit at
another institution for transfer to Vanderbilt. In appropriate
cases the Administrative Committee may prescribe conditions
that must be satisfied before the student returns from a probationary leave. Students who do not choose to return at the end
of a probationary leave but want to return later are required to
apply for readmission.
After their first year, full-time students may not be placed
on probation more than twice (continuance on probation for
a second semester counts as another probation). If a student’s
performance is deficient a third time, the student is dropped
from the university.
Students who have been authorized to carry fewer than 12
credit hours because of illness or outside employment may
be placed on academic probation if their work is deemed
unsatisfactory by the Administrative Committee; they are
removed from probation when the committee deems their
work satisfactory. If they are not removed from probation after
a reasonable period of time, such students are dropped.
The internal record of a student dropped from the university under these regulations shows the notation “Dropped for
scholastic deficiency.”
Class Standing
The Administrative Committee determines how many
semesters will be allowed for each part-time student to attain
sophomore, junior, or senior standing.
The internal record of a student dropped from the university under these regulations shows the notation “Failed to
qualify for class standing.”

Sophomore Standing
A student qualifies for sophomore standing upon completion
of 24 credit hours of work with a grade point average of at least
1.800, completion of two regular semesters (fall or spring), and
completion of the first-year writing requirement: successful
completion of English 1100 if required and successful completion of a First-Year Writing Seminar (numbered 1111 in various
disciplines). First-year students who fail to qualify for sophomore standing in two semesters are placed on probation and
must have the permission of the Administrative Committee to
register for a third semester. The third semester must be the
summer semester at Vanderbilt. Normally, students who do
not qualify for sophomore standing during this third semester
are dropped from the university.

Junior Standing
A student qualifies for junior standing upon completion of
54 credit hours of work with a grade point average of 1.900,
completion of four regular semesters (fall or spring), and
completion of a 1000-level writing course. Sophomores who

vanderbilt university

fail to qualify for junior standing within two semesters after
qualifying for sophomore standing are placed on probation
and must have the permission of the Administrative Committee to register for another semester. This additional semester
must be the summer semester at Vanderbilt. Normally, students who do not qualify for junior standing in this additional
semester are dropped from the university.

Senior Standing
A student qualifies for senior standing upon completion of 84
credit hours of work with a grade point average of 2.000 and
completion of six regular semesters (fall or spring). Juniors
who fail to qualify for senior standing within two semesters
after qualifying for junior standing are placed on probation
and must have the permission of the Administrative Committee to register for another semester. This additional semester
must be the summer semester at Vanderbilt. Normally, students who do not qualify for senior standing in this additional
semester are dropped from the university.
Seniors who fail to maintain a minimum grade point
average of 2.000 are placed on probation and must have the
permission of the Administrative Committee to register for
another semester.
Petitions and Appeals
The Administrative Committee of the College of Arts and
Science entertains petitions from currently enrolled students
for exceptions to academic regulations. Any student subject
to action by the Administrative Committee may appeal that
action to the committee in writing. Further appeals from decisions of the committee follow standard university policies as
described in the Student Handbook.
Returning to the College
Students on leave of absence return to the university at the
end of the leave. If they do not return at that time and want
to return later, they must apply to the Office of the University
Registrar for readmission. Students who are advised to withdraw from the university determine whether or not to return in
consultation with the Office of the Associate Deans. Students
who have been dropped may apply to the Office of the University Registrar for readmission; in most cases readmission is not
granted unless there has been an intervening period of at least
a year. The Office of the University Registrar forwards all documents to the Administrative Committee, which considers each
case on an individual basis. Readmission is competitive, and
there is no assurance that it will be granted. Students readmitted after having been advised to withdraw or after having been
dropped are automatically on final probation. If they fail to
regain good standing and to maintain it until graduation, they
are dropped again with little prospect for readmission. Application deadlines for readmission are as follows: July 15 for the fall
semester, November 15 for the spring semester, and April 1 for
the summer session.

College of Arts and Science / African American and Diaspora Studies

71

College of Arts and Science Programs of Study
African American and
Diaspora Studies
DIRECTOR David Ikard
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Claudine Taaffe
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Gilman W. Whiting
PROFESSORS Victor Anderson, Houston Baker, Tracy D.
Sharpley-Whiting
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Scot Brown, Tiffany R. Patterson,
Gilman W. Whiting
MELLON ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Alicia Monroe
SENIOR LECTURER Claudine Taaffe
WRITER IN RESIDENCE Alice Randall

THE concentration in African American and Diaspora Studies
requires 36 credit hours of course work. Approved courses
taken at Fisk University may be counted as electives in the
program. The course of study in the African American and
Diaspora Studies program is divided into three areas: Area
of Study I, Gender and Sexuality; Area of Study II, Literature,
Theory, and Visual Culture; and Area of Study III, Social Sciences. Courses that satisfy each area are listed under “Areas of
Study and Electives” below.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in African American and
Diaspora Studies
Requirements for the major include at least 36 hours of credit
as follows:
1. 3 credit hours from 1010, Introduction to African American
and Diaspora Studies.
2. 6 credit hours from Area of Study I, Gender and Sexuality.
3. 6 credit hours from Area of Study II, Literature, Theory,
and Visual Culture.
4. 6 credit hours from Area of Study III, Social Sciences.
5. 9 credit hours of electives chosen from Areas of Study I, II,
and III, not used to satisfy requirements 2 through 4 above.
6. 3 credit hours from 4270, Research Methods. Majors are
advised to take this course in the second semester of their
junior year.
7. 3 credit hours in either 4978 (fall) or 4979 (spring), Senior
Thesis in African American and Diaspora Studies.
At least 6 credit hours of the concentration must focus on
the Americas (outside of the United States) and/or Africa. No
more than 9 credit hours of course work may be taken at the
1000 level (excluding 1010).

Honors Program
The only route to honors in the major is writing a 3 credit hour
Senior Honors Thesis in AADS 4998 (fall) or 4999 (spring) and

passing an oral examination. Admission to the Honors Program
requires a student have a grade point average of at least 3.5 in
all AADS courses and a cumulative GPA of 3.3. A committee
of three faculty members (two of whom must be involved in
undergraduate teaching in the African American and Diaspora
Studies program) will evaluate the thesis. Students pursuing
the Senior Honors Thesis may apply to the program for nominal funding to assist with research projects. The chair of the
student’s thesis committee and two readers must attend the oral
examination. The oral defense will typically take place in the
second semester of the student’s senior year.

Minor in African American and Diaspora Studies
Requirements for completion of the minor include at least 21
credit hours as follows:
1. 3 credit hours in 1010, Introduction to African American
and Diaspora Studies.
2. 3 credit hours from Area of Study I, Gender and Sexuality.
3. 3 credit hours from Area of Study II, Literature, Theory, and
Visual Culture.
4. 3 credit hours from Area of Study III, Social Sciences.
5. 9 credit hours of electives chosen from Areas of Study I, II,
and III, not used to satisfy requirements 2 through 4 above.
At least 6 credit hours of the minor must focus on the Americas (outside of the United States) and/or Africa, and no more
than 6 credit hours of the minor can be taken at the 1000 level
(excluding 1010). Minors are encouraged, though not required,
to take 4270 Research Methods in the first semester of their
junior year.

Areas of Study
Courses with an asterisk in the lists below fulfill the Africa and
Americas outside of the United States portion of the major and
minor. Approved courses offered at Fisk may count toward
elective requirements.
Area of Study I, Gender and Sexuality
AADS: 1204* Diaspora Feminisms; 2104* Popular Culture and Black
Sexual Politics; 2204* Black Women and the Politics of Blackness and
Beauty; 2214 History & Myth: Black Women in the United States; 2294*
Black Paris–Paris Noir: The African Diaspora and the City of Light; 2654*
Memoirs and Biographies; 3104W* Soul Food as Text in Text: An Examination of African American Food ways; 3204W* African American Children’s
Literature; 3214* Black Masculinity: Social Imagery and Public Policy; 4264*
Black Diaspora Women Writers.
Area of Study II, Literature, Theory, and Visual Culture
AADS: 1016* Race Matters; 1506* Reel to Real: Film Aesthetics and
Representation; 1706* Capoeira; 2106 African Diaspora: A Problem for
Thought*; 2166 Blacks in Country Music; 2306* Race, Mixed Race, and
“Passing”; 2356* African Spirits in Exile: Diaspora Religions in the Americas; 3106 GOAT: Life, Times, and Politics of Muhammad Ali; 3206 Mystery,
Murder, and Mayhem in Black Detective Fiction; 4256* Haiti: Freedom,
Democracy; 4506 Slavery and Public Memory.

A&S

72
Area of Study III, Social Sciences
AADS: 1108* Making of the African Diaspora; 1408* Blacks in Latin America
and the Caribbean; 2168* Black Migrations in the African Diaspora; 2178*
Global Africa; 2208* Colonialism and After; 2698 African Diaspora Ethnography*; 3208W Blacks in the Military; 3258 Black Issues in Education; 3278*
Black Europe; 3458* Atlantic African Slave Trade; 4198* Global Anti-Blackness and Black Power*; 4228W Black Girlhood: History, Performance, and
Counter-Narratives; 4270 Research Methods.

Other Electives
Any course from the above three areas may serve as an elective
if it is not already being used to satisfy an Area requirement.
Please consult the director of undergraduate studies for
periodic updates about electives including courses that can be
taken at Fisk as electives for AADS.
AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 1111* First Year Writing
Seminar.
ANTHROPOLOGY: 2105* Race in the Americas*; 2106* Culture and Power in Latin America*.
ECONOMICS: 2150* Economic History of the United States.
ENGLISH: 3654*/3654W* African American Literature; 3658* LatinoAmerican Literature; 3674* Caribbean Literature; 3742* Feminist Theory.
FRENCH: 3232* Introduction to Francophone Literature*; 4023* The African
Novel*.
HISTORY: 1270* Sub-Saharan Africa 1400–1800*, 1280* Africa since
1800*; 1410* U.S. 1877–1945: Reconstruction through World War II; 1440*
African American History since 1877; 2450* Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America, 1700–1820; 2490* Brazilian Civilization; 2570* Caribbean History 1492–1983; 2620* The Old South; 2630* The New South;
2690* The Civil Rights Movement; 3040* Health and African American Experience; 3200* Poverty, Economy, Society in Sub-Saharan Africa.
HISTORY OF ART: 4960* Advanced Seminar in History of Art.
MUSIC: 1100* World Music*; 1105* African Music*; 1600* American Popular Music; 1620* Survey of Jazz; 1630* The Blues; 2150* Music, Identity,
and Diversity.
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 1100* Introduction to African American Religious
Traditions; 3119* Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Social Roles of Religion.
SOCIOLOGY: 3207* Popular Culture Dynamics; 3304* Race, Gender, and
Health; 3702* Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the United States; 3711*
Women, Gender, and Globalization; 3722* Gender in Society; 3723* Gender, Sexuality, and the Body.
SPANISH: 3835* Latino Immigration Experience*; 4750* Afro-Hispanic
Literature*.
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1150*/1150W* Sex and Gender in
Everyday Life; 2240* Introduction to Women’s Health; 3250*/3250W Contemporary Women’s Movements.
Course descriptions begin on page 141.

vanderbilt university

American Studies
DIRECTOR Sarah Igo (History)
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR Gabriel Torres-Colón
PROFESSORS Richard Blackett (History), C. André Christie-Mizell
(Sociology), Dan Cornfield (Sociology), Colin Dayan (English), Marshall
C. Eakin (History), Ted Fischer (Anthropology), Vivien Fryd (History
of Art), Larry Isaac (Sociology), Dana Nelson (English), Cecelia Tichi
(English)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Vanessa Beasley (Communication Studies),
Jim Fraser (Human and Organizational Development), Teresa A.
Goddu (English), Sarah Igo (History), Leah Lowe (Theatre), Ifeoma
Kiddoe Nwankwo (English), Richard Pitt (Sociology), Paul Stob
(Communication Studies)
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Aimi Hamraie (Medicine, Health, and Society)
SENIOR LECTURERS Susan Kevra (French), Gabriel Torres-Colón
LECTURER Tatiana McInnis
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Kate A. Daniels (English), Joni Hersch (Law), Jonathan
Metzl (Medicine, Health, and Society), Kelly Oliver (Philosophy), Lucius
Outlaw, Jr. (Philosophy), Laurel C. Schneider (Religious Studies), Dan
Sharfstein (Law), Hortense Spillers (English), Emilie Townes (Divinity),
Dan Usner (History), David Williams II (Law)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Derek Griffith (Medicine, Health, and
Society), Claire Sisco King (Communication Studies), Richard Lloyd
(Sociology), Jim Lovensheimer (Musicology), Paul Miller (French and
Italian), Ann Neely (Teaching and Learning)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Ashley Carse (Human and Organizational
Development), Ken MacLeish (Medicine, Health, and Society,
Anthropology), Sara Safransky (Human and Organizational
Development)
SENIOR LECTURER Chalene Helmuth (Latin American Studies)
OTHER AFFILIATED FACULTY Joe Bandy (Assistant Director of the
Center for Teaching)

THE Program in American Studies is an interdisciplinary
program allowing study of the diversity of American culture
from a variety of intellectual perspectives. Through course
offerings, colloquia, and research opportunities, students and
faculty examine the formation of social, legal, cultural, and
economic identities within the borders of the United States as
well as in dialogue with the broader geographic and geopolitical parameters of the Americas, including Canada, Mexico, the
Caribbean, and Central and South America. Matters of class,
race, region, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, religion, migration,
environment, technology, politics, and the arts are central
to the curriculum. The program allows study at the local,
subnational, national, and international levels, from in-depth
investigation of Nashville communities to research on transnational nongovernmental organizations. The American Studies
program encourages and provides opportunities for on- and
off-campus research, internships, study abroad, and individualized and group projects under the guidance of participating
faculty in the humanities, arts, and social sciences.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in American Studies
The interdisciplinary major in American studies consists of 36
credit hours of course work, distributed as follows:
1. Core Requirements
6 credit hours
2. International Requirement 3 credit hours

College of Arts and Science / American Studies

3. Distribution Requirements 18 credit hours
4. Electives
9 credit hours
Note: No course may be counted twice in calculating the
36 credit hours. No more than 6 credit hours at the 1000 level
can count toward the interdisciplinary major. Students seeking
a second major may count a maximum of 6 credit hours of
course work toward meeting requirements in both majors.
1. Core Requirements (6 credit hours)
Core Courses:
AMER 4000, The American Studies Workshop (3 credit
hours)
AMER 4960, Senior Project (3 credit hours)
2. International Requirement (3 credit hours)
One of the following:
a) A semester abroad in a Vanderbilt-approved study
abroad program and an additional 3-credit-hour
elective
b) AMER 3200, Global Perspectives on the U.S. (3 credit
hours)
c) One of the following:
Anthropology: 3161, Colonial Encounters in the Americas.
Asian Studies: 2560, Current Japan–U.S. Relations.
Economics: 4520W, Seminar on Globalization.
English: 3674, Caribbean Literature; 3898, 3898W, Special Topics in
English and American Literature.
History: 1370, Colonial Latin America; 1380, Independence in Latin
America; 2450, Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America, 1700–
1820; 2470, Revolutionary Mexico; 2480, Central America; 2510, Reform
and Revolution in Latin America; 2535, Latin America and the United
States; 2570, Caribbean History, 1492–1983; 2700, The U.S. and the
World; 2710, The U.S. as a World Power; 3890, Selected Topics in History.
Interdisciplinary Studies: 3831, Global Citizenship and Service; 3832,
Global Community Service; 3833, Seminar in Global Citizenship and Service.
Jewish Studies: 2450, The Jewish Diaspora.
Latin American Studies: 2101, Introduction to Latin America; 2301,
Music of Protest and Social Change in Latin America; 3891, Special Topics in Latin American Studies.
Political Science: 3217, Latin American Politics; 2219, Politics of
Mexico; 2225, International Political Economy; 3228, International Politics
of Latin America; 2236, The Politics of Global Inequality.
Religious Studies: 4551, Islamic Mysticism.
Sociology: 3231, Contemporary Latin America; 3232, Contemporary
Mexican Society.
Spanish: 3370, Spanish American Civilization; 3375, Film and Culture in
Latin America; 4740, Spanish-American Literature of the Boom Era; 4741,
Spanish-American Literature of the Post-Boom Era.

3. Distribution Requirements (18 credit hours)
6 credit hours from at least two different departments or
programs in each of the following three areas:
a) Humanities: Classical Studies, Communication Studies,
English, History of Art, Music, Philosophy, Religious
Studies, Spanish and Portuguese, Theatre.
b) Social Sciences: Anthropology, Economics, History,
Political Science, Sociology.

73

c) Interdisciplinary Programs: African American and
Diaspora Studies; American Studies; Cinema and Media
Arts; Earth and Environmental Sciences; Jewish Studies;
Latin American Studies; Medicine, Health, and Society;
Women’s and Gender Studies.
Note: See below for a list of approved courses in each of
these areas.
4. Electives (9 credit hours)
Three courses taken from the approved list of courses. Students should choose these courses in consultation with their
adviser to form a study of concentration.

Minor in American Studies
The interdisciplinary minor in American studies consists of 18
credit hours of course work, distributed as follows:
1. Core Requirements
3 credit hours
2. International Requirement 3 credit hours
3. Distribution Requirements 9 credit hours
4. Electives
3 credit hours
Note: No course may be counted twice in calculating 18
credit hours. No more than 6 credit hours at the 1000 level can
count toward the interdisciplinary minor. Students seeking a
minor may count a maximum of 3 credit hours of course work
toward meeting requirements in both their major and minor.
1. Core Requirements (3 credit hours)
Core Course: AMER 4000, The American Studies Workshop
(3 credit hours)
2. International Requirement (3 credit hours)
One of the following:
a) A semester abroad in a Vanderbilt-approved study
abroad program and an additional 3-credit-hour
elective.
b) AMER 3200, Global Perspectives on the U.S. (3 credit
hours)
c) One course from the list of courses under the International Requirement, part C, of the major.
3. Distribution Requirements (9 credit hours)
3 credit hours in each of the following three areas:
a) Humanities: Classical Studies, Communication Studies,
English, History of Art, Music, Philosophy, Religious
Studies, Spanish and Portuguese, Theatre
b) Social Sciences: Anthropology, Economics, History,
Political Science, Sociology, Psychology
c) Interdisciplinary Programs: African American and
Diaspora Studies; American Studies; Cinema and Media
Arts; Earth and Environmental Sciences; Jewish Studies;
Latin American Studies; Medicine, Health, and Society;
Women’s and Gender Studies
Note: See below for a list of approved courses in each of
these areas.
4. Electives (3 credit hours)
One to two courses taken from the approved list of courses.
Students should choose this course in consultation with their
adviser to form a study of concentration.

A&S

74

Honors Program
The Honors Program in American Studies offers superior
students a more intensive concentration within their major
field. The program requires:
1. Completion of the requirements of the major.
2. A 3.3 cumulative grade point average.
3. A 3.5 cumulative grade point average in American studies.
4. 6 credit hours in the fall and spring semesters of the senior
year in AMER 4998/4999 devoted to a major research
project leading to an honors thesis. 4999 counts as the
Senior Project (4960), and 4998 counts as elective credit for
the requirements of the major.
5. An Honors thesis to be completed by the spring of the
senior year.
6. Successful completion of an oral examination focusing on
the topic of the thesis.
Exceptional achievement on the thesis will earn highest
honors. Applications are accepted in March of the junior year.
Additional information is available from the director of the
American Studies program.

General Advice for Majors and Minors
We encourage students to enter the major through a number
of avenues: a first-year seminar, our introductory course to
the major, AMER 1002/1002W, or an introductory course in
a particular discipline or program. While we do not require
a set path into the major, up to 6 credit hours of introductory
courses can count toward the major.
Once having declared a major or minor, students should
work closely with their adviser to develop a coherent plan
of study. We encourage students to concentrate on a theme
or topic of special interest, either by choosing courses with a
topical coherence each semester or by choosing a single topic
to focus their major around. We also highly encourage our
majors to seek opportunities for study abroad or internship
possibilities. Students should plan on taking the American
Studies Workshop during their junior year and our capstone
course, the Senior Project, during their senior year. Distributional requirements and electives should be decided in
conjunction with the student’s adviser.
We also encourage our students to participate in American
Studies programming that occurs outside the classroom, such
as visiting speakers and our Road Trip Series.
Please consult the American Studies program website for
detailed descriptions of courses. For all 1111, special topic, and
independent study courses, the course must be on an American topic, as approved by the director of the American Studies
program. Note: 1111 in all departments receives credit when an
American topic is offered.

Approved List of Courses
AREA A: HUMANITIES
ART: 1099, Maymester Contemporary Art Blitz (when U.S. city/art).
CLASSICAL STUDIES: 3000, Classical Tradition in America.
COMMUNICATION STUDIES: 2800, Rhetoric and Civic Life; 3000, Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1640–1865; 3001, Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1865 to 1945; 3100, Rhetoric of Social Movements; 3002,
Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1945–Present; 3110, Women, Rhet-

vanderbilt university
oric, and Social Change; 3720, Communicating Gender; 2950, Rhetoric
of Mass Media; 3700, Politics and Mass Media; 3890, Selected Topics in
Communication Studies; 4940–4941, Seminars in Selected Topics.
ENGLISH: 2316, 2316W, Representative American Writers; 2320, Southern Literature; 3624W, Literature of the American Civil War; 3710–3711,
Literature and Intellectual History (when an American topic is offered);
3644–3645, Twentieth-Century American Novel; 3640, Modern British and
American Poetry: Yeats to Auden; 3646, Poetry since World War II; 3622,
Nineteenth-Century American Women Writers; 3654, 3654W, African
American Literature; 3642, Film and Modernism; 3620, Nineteenth-Century
American Literature; 3692, Desire in America: Literature, Cinema, and History; 3694, America on Film: Art and Ideology; 3695, America on Film: Performance and Culture; 3899, Special Topics in Film; 3674, Caribbean Literature; 3890, 3890W, Movements in Literature (when an American topic is
offered); 3892, 3892W, Problems in Literature (when an American topic is
offered); 3894, 3894W, Major Figures in Literature; 3658, Latino-American
Literature; 3662, 3662W, Asian American Literature; 3650, 3650W, Ethnic
American Literature; 3746, Workshop in English and History; 3644, Jewish
American Literature; 3680–3681, Twentieth-Century Drama; 3896, Special
Topics in Investigative Writing in America; 3898, 3898W, Special Topics in
English and American Literature (when an American topic is offered).
HISTORY OF ART: 2720, Modern Architecture; 3735, History of Photography; 2660, American Art to 1865; 2760, Early American Modernism, 1865–
1945; 2765, Art since 1945; 4960, Advanced Seminar (when an American
topic is offered).
MUSIC LITERATURE AND HISTORY: 1610, Musical Theatre in America:
A Cultural History; 2600, American Music; 1620, Survey of Jazz; 1600,
American Popular Music; 1630, The Blues; 1640, Country Music; 1650,
History of Rock Music; 2150, Music, Identity, and Diversity; 2610, Music of
the South; 2320, Exploring the Film Soundtrack.
OTHER MUSIC COURSES: 1300, Music and the Fall of Segregation.
PHILOSOPHY: 2110, Contemporary Philosophy; 3008, American Philosophy; 2104, Nineteenth-Century Philosophy; 3603, Philosophy of Education; 3623, Modern Philosophies of Law.
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 1100, Introduction to African American Religious
Traditions; 1190W, Introduction to Southern Religion and Culture; 3304W,
Evangelical Protestantism and the Culture Wars; 3119, Martin Luther King,
Jr., and the Social Roles of Religion; 3142, Slave Thought and Culture in
the American South.
SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE: 3375, Film and Culture in Latin America;
3835, Latino Immigration Experience; 4750, Afro-Hispanic Literature.
THEATRE: 1811, Marshals, Mobsters, Monsters, Magnums, and Musicals:
American Movie Genres; 2204, Histories of Theatre and Drama III: The U.S.
Stage.
AREA B: SOCIAL SCIENCES
ANTHROPOLOGY: 2105, Race in the Americas.
ECONOMICS: 2100, Labor Economics; 2150, Economic History of the
United States; 2890, Special Topics; 3100, Wages, Employment, and Labor
Markets; 3150, Topics in the Economic History of the U.S.
HISTORY: 1390, America to 1776: Discovery to Revolution; 1400, U.S.
1776–1877: Revolution to Civil War and Reconstruction; 1410, U.S. 1877–
1945: Reconstruction through World War II; 1420, U.S. Post-1945: Cold
War to the Present; 1427W, America in the Seventies; 1430W, American
Indians and the Environment; 1440, African American History since 1877;
1660, American Enterprise; 1690, Sea Power in History; 1730, The U.S.
and the Cold War; 1740, The U.S. and the Vietnam War; 2840, Sexuality
and Gender in the Western Tradition since 1700; 3010, Pornography and
Prostitution in History; 2535, Latin America and the United States; 2580,
American Indian History before 1850; 2590, American Indian History since
1850; 2610, The Founding Generation; 2620, The Old South; 2630, The
New South; 2640, Appalachia; 2662, American Slavery; 2690, The Civil
Rights Movement; 2691, Barack Obama: Man and President; 2700, The
U.S. and the World; 2710, The U.S. as a World Power; 2721, Globalizing

College of Arts and Science / Anthropology
American History, 1877–1929; 2730, American Masculinities; 2749, American Intellectual History to 1865; 2750, American Intellectual History since
1865; 2800, Modern Medicine; 2810, Women, Health, and Sexuality; 3040,
Health and the African American Experience; 3140, History of New Orleans;
3170, The Federalist Papers; 3746, Workshop in English and History; 3890,
Selected Topics in History (when an American topic is offered); 4960, Majors
Seminar (when an American topic is offered).
POLITICAL SCIENCE: 1100, Introduction to American Government and
Politics; 1150, U.S. Elections; 2222, American Foreign Policy; 2240, Political
Parties; 3241, American Public Opinion and Voting Behavior; 2243, Political
Campaigns and the Electoral Process; 3244, The Legislative Process; 2245,
The American Presidency; 3247, American Political Culture; 3249, American Political Thought; 3250, Group Conflict and Cooperation in U.S. Politics;
2255, Public Policy Problems; 3260, Introduction to American Law; 2262,
The Judicial Process; 2263, Religion and Politics; 2265, Constitutional Law:
Powers and Structures of Government; 2266, Constitutional Law: Civil Liberties and Rights; 3272W, The War in Iraq, 2003–2011; 3891, Topics in Contemporary Politics; 3893, Selected Topics of American Government; 3897,
Selected Topics (when an American topic is offered).
SOCIOLOGY: 3601, Self, Society, and Social Change; 3602, Change and
Social Movements in the Sixties; 3204, Tourism, Culture, and Place; 3611,
Women and the Law; 3603, Women and Social Activism; 3201, Cultural
Consumption and Audiences; 3221, The Family; 3621, Criminology; 3622,
Delinquency and Juvenile Justice; 3624, Prison Life; 3233, Contemporary
American Society; 3301, Society and Medicine; 3222, Sociology of Religion; 3207, Popular Culture Dynamics; 3604, American Social Movements;
3722, Gender in Society; 3616, Women and Public Policy in America; 3223,
Schools and Society: The Sociology of Education; 3702, Racial and Ethnic
Minorities in the United States; 3724, Gender Identities, Interactions, and
Relationships; 3322, Immigration in America; 4961, Seminars in Selected
Topics (when an American topic is offered).
AREA C: INTERDISCIPLINARY PROGRAMS
AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 1010, Introduction to African American and Diaspora Studies; 1016, Race Matters; 3206, Mystery,
Murder, and Mayhem in Black Detective Fiction; 3104W, Soul Food as Text
in Text: An Examination of African American Foodways; 3214, Black Masculinity: Social Imagery and Public Policy; 3258, Black Issues in Education.
AMERICAN STUDIES: 1002, 1002W, Introduction to American Studies;
1111, First-Year Writing Seminar; 3200, Global Perspectives on the U.S.;
3890, Topics in American Studies; 3881, Internship Readings and Research; 3851, Independent Readings and Research; 3852, Independent
Readings and Research; 4000, The American Studies Workshop; 4100,
Undergraduate Seminar in American Studies; 4960, Senior Project; 4998,
Senior Honors Research; 4999, Senior Honors Thesis.
CINEMA AND MEDIA ARTS: 1600, Introduction to Film and Media Studies.
JEWISH STUDIES: 2280/2280W, Jewish Humor; 2420W, American Jewish Music; 2400, American Jewish Life; 2560, Social Movements in Modern
Jewish Life; 3830, Contemporary Jewish Issues.
LATIN AMERICAN STUDIES: 2601, Latin America, Latinos, and the United
States.
MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 1930, Fundamental Issues in Medicine, Health, and Society; 3020, U.S. Public Health Ethics and Policy; 3150,
Death and Dying in America; 3890, Special Topics.
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 2243, Sociologies of Men and Masculinity; 3246W, Women’s Rights, Women’s Wrongs; 2248, Humor and
Cultural Critique in Fannie Flagg’s Novels; 2249, Women and Humor in
the Age of Television; 3250/3250W, Contemporary Women’s Movements;
2259/2259W, Reading and Writing Lives; 2268, Gender, Race, Justice, and
the Environment; 3271, Feminist Legal Theory; 3891, Special Topics: Topics
in Gender, Culture, and Representation; 3893, Selected Topics (when an
American topic is offered).
Course descriptions begin on page 143.

75

Anthropology
CHAIR Beth A. Conklin
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Markus Eberl
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Tiffiny A. Tung
PROFESSORS EMERITI Thomas A. Gregor, Ronald Spores
PROFESSORS Arthur A. Demarest, Tom D. Dillehay, Edward F. Fischer,
Lesley Gill
RESEARCH PROFESSOR Charles E. Orser Jr.
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Jada Benn-Torres, Beth A. Conklin, Markus
Eberl, William R. Fowler Jr., T. S. Harvey, John W. Janusek, Norbert
Ross, Tiffiny A. Tung, Steven A. Wernke
RESEARCH ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Patricia Netherly
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Carwil Bjork-James
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Sophie Bjork-James
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Anna Guengerich
SENIOR LECTURERS Mareike Sattler, Jeffrey Shenton, Anna Catesby
Yant

ANTHROPOLOGY is the study of human diversity in all times
and places. It brings together perspectives from the sciences
and humanities, and from non-Western as well as Western
societies, to illuminate different aspects of the human past, the
human body, and contemporary social life. Global perspectives, fieldwork and experiential learning, and concerns with
ethics, justice, and social well-being are hallmarks of anthropology. Vanderbilt’s program has a strong research focus on
Latin America and historically marginalized groups, especially
indigenous people and descendants of the African diaspora.
Students majoring in anthropology take courses in several
subfields, each of which looks at humanity from a different
perspective. Cultural anthropology examines the relationships,
beliefs, values, and political-economic practices that shape
individual behavior, community life, and power in society.
Archaeology studies past cultures through their material
remains. Linguistics explores relations between language
and culture. Biological anthropology examines topics such
as human evolution, genetics, and human biology. Courses
cluster around themes of cross-cultural health, biology, food,
and medical systems; inequality, power, and social-political
relations; material culture, human-environment relations, and
spatial analysis; religion and politics; and worldviews, language, and cognition. Unless indicated otherwise in the course
description, anthropology courses have no prerequisites and
are open to all majors and non-majors.
Knowledge of the diversity of human histories and lifeways
is vital to imagining alternative paths to a better society. Anthropology develops this knowledge through experiential learning
that challenges students to go beyond the familiar, to see, understand, and create in new ways. This preparation is useful in all
professional careers that involve understanding human behavior,
working with people from different backgrounds, analyzing
complex information, and thinking holistically.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Anthropology
The major in anthropology requires completion of at least 30
credit hours of course work, as follows:

A&S

76

1. At least three 1000-level surveys (chosen from Anthropology 1101, 1201, 1301, 1601) covering the four subfields of
anthropology: cultural anthropology, biological anthropology, archaeology, and linguistic anthropology.
2. A minimum of three credit hours from each of the groups
below:
Group I—Comparative Anthropology and Anthropological
Theory: 2105, 2220, 2220W, 2370, 3121, 3122, 3132, 3133,
3140, 3141, 3142, 3143, 3145, 3150, 3150W, 3160, 3262, 3900,
3901, 4152, 4153, 4154, 4155
Group II—Archaeology and Biological Anthropology: 2211,
2230, 2231, 2342, 3130, 3161, 3162, 3200, 3201, 3202, 3240,
3242, 3243, 3243W, 3250, 3260, 3261, 3343, 3344, 3371, 3372,
3620, 3620W, 3866, 4345, 4373
Group III—Ethnography, Ethnohistory, and Linguistics:
2106, 2107, 2108, 2109, 2223, 2227, 2250, 2601, 2602, 2603,
2614, 3120, 3130, 3134, 3144, 3161, 3241, 3614, 3622
3. A seminar on anthropological theory (3900 or 3901). The
seminar may not also be used to count toward Group I
credit above.
4. At least 18 credit hours must be at the 2000 level or higher.
5. The remainder of the credit hours must be chosen from
ANTH courses not already used to satisfy the requirements
listed above.
6. With the approval of the student’s major adviser, a
maximum of 3 credit hours for a course taken in another
department or program may be counted toward the major
requirement. A variety of courses are possible, including
but not limited to those listed below. In each case, the
course must be relevant to the student’s program and the
student must receive the approval of the director of undergraduate studies.
• African American and Diaspora Studies 2178, 3178;
Biological Sciences 2205; History 1270, 2490; History of
Art 2210; Latin American Studies 2301, 2601; Mathematics
1010, 1011; Medicine, Health, and Society 1930, 2130, 2240,
2250, 2420, 2430, 3010, 3020, 3110, 3140, 3150, 3210, 3212,
3220, 3250; Music Literature 1100, 1105, 2110; Religious
Studies 4554; Sociology 3001, 3221, 3232, 3311, 3313, 3314;
Spanish 3360.

Honors Program
The Honors Program in Anthropology is designed to afford
superior students the opportunity to pursue more intensive
work within the major field. Students who want to do honors
work in anthropology should contact the director of the Honors Program in the fall of their junior year. The completion of
the Honors Program requires: a) 4–5 credit hours in Anthropology 4998 (Honors Research), evaluated by honors thesis
adviser, b) 4–5 credit hours in Anthropology 4999 (Honors
Thesis), evaluated by honors thesis adviser, c) submission of a
written thesis, evaluated by the student’s honors committee, d)
an oral presentation of the thesis (15–20) minutes, evaluated by
the student’s honors committee, e) an oral examination of the
thesis, administered by the student’s honors committee. The
Honors Research- and Honors Thesis-hours are expected to be

vanderbilt university

in excess of the 30 credit hours required for the anthropology
major.

Minor in Anthropology
The minor in anthropology requires 18 credit hours of course
work that includes any two of the introductory courses: ANTH
1101, 1301, 1201, 1601; one course listed in Group I in the major;
and three additional courses from any combination of the
courses listed in Group I, II, and III in the major.
Course descriptions begin on page 143.

Arabic
SENIOR LECTURERS M. Issam Eido, Bushra Hamad

Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 147.

Art
CHAIR Mark Hosford
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Vesna Pavlovic
PROFESSORS EMERITI Michael Aurbach, Marilyn L. Murphy
PROFESSORS Maria Magdalena Campos-Pons, Mel Ziegler
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Mark Hosford, Vesna Pavlovic
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Jonathan Rattner
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Jana Harper
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURER Susan DeMay
SENIOR LECTURER Farrar Hood Cusomato
LECTURERS Alex Blau, Patrick DeGuira, John Warren
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSOR David Wood (Philosophy)

COURSES in art are offered in a variety of media, which
provide wide-ranging methods and perspectives. Our courses
emphasize creative and critical approaches to learning.
Many students will use the program in art as a foundation
for careers in which creativity and the visual are especially
valued, as the basis for advanced training in professional
schools (such as art, architecture, museum studies), and for
employment in galleries, museums, commercial art, or designrelated fields. An important goal of the department is to help
students become readers of the rich visual environment in our
culture throughout their lives, as well as to encourage creative
approaches to learning in all disciplines.
The Department of Art offers several opportunities for
extracurricular activities in the arts. Recently a student-run
art gallery opened. BLUEprint is an organization for students

College of Arts and Science / Art

interested in entering the field of architecture. Our Space 204
arts laboratory has exhibitions and workshops all year long.
Studio VU lecture series brings some of the most important
artists working today to campus for lectures and one-on-one
studio visits with students.
There are several campus organizations in the arts. The
Sarratt Visual Arts Committee allows students to have a hand
in curating and hanging exhibitions, as well as hosting art
openings at the Sarratt Gallery. Visions sponsors lectures and
discussions about the history of art as well as a roundtable of
alumni majors, who discuss their current careers and how they
arrived at them.
Since 1984 the department has supervised the awarding
of the Margaret Stonewall Wooldridge Hamblet Award to an
eligible senior student. The Hamblet Award provides the means
for travel and independent art activity for one year, culminating in a one-person exhibition at Vanderbilt. Students wanting
to participate in the spring competition must be graduating
seniors who are studio art majors.
The Allan P. Deloach Memorial Prize in Photography was
established in 2000 in memory of Allan Deloach (B.A. 1963)
by two of his colleagues at IBM. This cash award is open to
any student who has taken a studio class in any discipline
at Vanderbilt. Midsouth Ceramics awards are given to the
top three ceramic projects in the annual open house, and the
recently established Plaza Artists Materials award is given to
four students each year. All competitions are judged by outside
professional artists.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Art
The art major requires 36 credit hours and presents our
students the opportunity to explore their ideas conceptually,
as well as to learn the technical skills involved in the creation
of art. The program offers a wide range of classes and media.
Our students are offered a strong grounding in traditional
processes such as drawing, painting, ceramics, and sculpture,
as well as the opportunity to explore contemporary processes
involving video, performance, digital photographic media,
installation, and social interactive art practice. Our diverse
faculty of artist/educators represents a wide range of teaching
styles and aesthetic philosophies. We consider how ideas have
been developed through the centuries as well as how specific
techniques have been used to enrich the expression of the idea.
In addition to modern art history offerings, art majors are
encouraged to take courses in pre-Renaissance, non-Western
art history, philosophy of aesthetics, and film. The Contemporary Art Maymester offers an opportunity to study contemporary art in a concentrated manner.

Requirements for the Program of Concentration in Art
Foundation Requirement (6 credit hours)
• 1101 and 1102

77

Studio Requirements (15 credit hours), which must include at
least:
• One 2-D course (ARTS 1600, 1601, 1503, 1200, 1201, 1202,
1300, 2100, 2101, 2102, 2600, 3600, 2200, 3200, 2202,
2300, 3101, 3102, 3300)
• One 3-D course (ARTS 1400, 1401, 1500, 1501, 1502, 2400,
2401, 2500)
• One time-based course (ARTS 1700, 1701, 1702, 2700,
2701, 2702)
Within the 15 credit hours, students must take at least one
2000-level or higher ARTS course.
Related Requirement (9 credit hours), which must include one
course (3 credit hours) of each of the following:
• Either HART 1100 or 1105 (suggested for entry into
2000-level HART courses)
• ARTS 1800
• 2000-level HART course or one course from the following: ARTS 1099, 3891, CMA 1600, 2300, PHIL 3014
Department highly recommends taking ARTS 1800 Sources of
Contemporary Art course prior to senior year.
Directed Study (6 credit hours)
• 3970, Directed Study: Senior Show and Contemporary
Practices
• 3971, Independent Research: Senior Show
Majors are required to complete the Independent Research
course, ARTS 3971, their senior year. This course is designed
specifically to help prepare majors for their Senior Show, and
is typically taken in the second semester of the senior year. No
other independent research/study course may be counted
toward the major.

Honors Program in Art
The Honors Program in the Department of Art offers excelling
art majors the opportunity to pursue their interest at a higher
level. To be admitted to the Honors Program in Art, students
must have:
• At least a 3.30 cumulative GPA.
• At least a 3.5 GPA in courses that count toward the
major in art.
• Completed the sophomore year.
Students interested in pursuing the honors program should
contact the director of undergraduate studies. Application
materials must be submitted to the director of undergraduate studies in the applicant’s junior year; applications may be
submitted electronically. Applications must include ten digital
images of recent work with written explanations of each image.
Applicants will be notified in writing of the department’s
decision.
Each honors student shall have a committee consisting of
one faculty member appointed by the department chair, the
student’s selected honors adviser, and the director of undergraduate studies.
Requirements for graduation with honors in art:
1. Successful completion of the requirements for the major in
art.

A&S

78

vanderbilt university

2. During the senior year the student is required to register for
ARTS 4998 (3 credit hours) in the first semester and 4999 (3
credit hours) in the second semester in order to complete
a written thesis, expanding concepts explored in the senior
exhibition.
3. Successful oral defense of the thesis and senior exhibition
during the final semester of undergraduate study.
4. At least a final 3.30 cumulative GPA.
5. At least a final 3.5 GPA in courses that count toward the
major in art.

Minor in Art
The minor in art requires 18 credit hours of course work,
including the following:
•

HART 1105 or ARTS 1800;

•

ARTS 1102 (Drawing and Composition I); and four other
ARTS courses, with at least one at the 2000-or-higher level.

Course descriptions begin on page 149.

director of undergraduate studies. Students should consult
with the director or DUS before applying to a study abroad
program.

Program of Concentration in Asian Studies
The major in Asian studies requires a minimum of 36 credit
hours of course work and is designed to ensure that graduates
have both depth and breadth in their understanding of Asia.
For the major in Asian studies, students must formally
declare an area of concentration at the time the major is
declared (China, Japan, or South Asia) and complete at least
36 credit hours from the Asian Studies Course List (see below),
according to these rules:
1. At least 3 credit hours in an Asian language taught in the
Asian Studies program at the 3301 (Advanced I) level or
above. Asian languages not offered by the Asian Studies
program require the approval of the Asian Studies program
director or the director of undergraduate studies.
2. At least 9 non-language credit hours of courses in area of
concentration.
3. At least 6 non-language credit hours of courses eligible for
Asian Perspectives.

Asian Studies
ACTING DIRECTOR Ruth Rogaski
PROFESSORS Robert Campany, Gerald Figal (Joint with History)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Ben Tran, Guojun Wang
SENIOR LECTURERS Xianmin Liu, Michiru Lowe, Elliott McCarter,
Keiko Nakajima
LECTURERS Yinghui Guo, Jing Liu, Asami Nakano, Qing Wei
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Yoshikuni Igarashi (History), Tony K. Stewart (Religious
Studies)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Brett Benson (Political Science), Tracy Miller
(History of Art), Ruth Rogaski (History), Samira Sheikh (History), Lijun
Song (Sociology and Medicine, Health, and Society), Tariq Thachil
(Political Science)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Se Young Kim (Cinema and Media Arts),
Peter Lorge (History), Bryan Lowe (Religious Studies), Akshya Saxena
(English), Haerin Shin (English), Heeryoon Shin (History of Art), Anand
V. Taneja (Religious Studies)
SENIOR LECTURER EMERITUS James Auer (Center for U.S.–Japan
Studies)
LECTURER Piyali Bhattacharya (English)

THE Asian Studies program provides students with a foundation in the languages and cultures of Asia necessary to pursue
a career within the rapidly developing marketplace that is Asia
or to go on to graduate study in an Asia-related subject. With
the intensive study of modern Asian languages at its core, the
program embraces a wide variety of courses in the art, culture,
economics, history, film and media, politics, religion, and sociology of East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. Through their
teaching and research, the affiliated faculty members promote
a better understanding of multiple facets of life in Asia and the
region’s relationship with the rest of the world, past and present.
Majors and minors are strongly encouraged to complete
a study abroad program in Asia. Up to 6 credit hours of
Asia-related courses from Vanderbilt-approved study abroad
programs may be applied toward the major or minor upon
approval of the director of the Asian Studies program or

4. Up to 18 credit hours of courses in any Asian language
offered by the Asian Studies program may be applied to the
total 36 credit hours.
Advanced Placement credits in language do not count toward
credit hours required for the major or minors, but can figure
into the assessment of initial placement within a language track.

Honors Program in Asian Studies
In addition to following the requirements set by the College of
Arts and Science, the following must be satisfied:
1. All of the requirements for the major in Asian studies.
2. 3 credit hours of ASIA 3980 Juniors Honors Readings. If
ASIA 3980 is not offered, this requirement may be substituted by an alternative course, with approval by the Asian
Studies program director or the director of undergraduate
studies.
3. ASIA 4998 (3 credit hours) and 4999 (3 credit hours). Honors Research must be taken while in residence at Vanderbilt.
The candidate will write an honors thesis while completing
the two-semester Honors Research sequence. The honors
thesis is a research paper on a topic defined by the student
in consultation with the faculty adviser and approved in
advance by the Honors Committee (see below for definition of Honors Committee).
Note: 3980, 4998, and 4999 may count toward the 36 credit
hours required for the major.
4. A minimum 3.30 cumulative grade point average with a
minimum 3.50 grade point average in courses that count
toward the major in Asian studies upon completion of the
Honors requirements.
5. An oral examination on the thesis typically scheduled
within the two months prior to graduation.
Study abroad in a country relevant to the Honors Research
project is strongly recommended.
A three-member Honors Committee of Asian Studies faculty administers the Honors Program. The committee will set

College of Arts and Science / Asian Studies

guidelines for the thesis topic proposal, publish deadlines each
year, and administer the oral examination. Students submit the
name of the faculty adviser and the proposed thesis topic to
this committee for approval early in the second semester of the
junior year. If the student is studying abroad that semester, the
proposed thesis topic should be submitted in the first semester
of the junior year or arrangements should be made to submit
the thesis topic from abroad during the second semester of the
junior year.

Minor in Asian Studies
The minor in the Asian Studies program provides a broad
knowledge of the languages, literatures, politics, histories, film
and media, arts, and religions of China and Japan. Students
cannot combine the Asian studies minor with other minors
within the Program in Asian Studies.
For the minor in Asian studies, students must complete at
least 17 credit hours from the Asian Studies Course List (see
below), according to these rules:
1. At least 5 credit hours in any Asian languages taught in the
Asian Studies program at the 2201 (Intermediate I) level or
above
2. At least 6 credit hours of History Survey Courses
3. At least 3 credit hours of Humanities Courses
4. At least 3 credit hours of Social Sciences Courses
5. Up to 5 credit hours of any Asian language courses taught
in the Asian Studies program may be applied to the total 17
credit hours

Minor in Chinese Language and Culture
The minor in Chinese language and culture is anchored by a
firm foundation in language study that is complemented by
electives in art, history, literature, film and media, politics, and
religion. Students cannot combine the Chinese language and
culture minor with other minors within the Asian Studies
program.
For the minor in Chinese language and culture, students
must complete at least 18 total credit hours from the Asian
Studies Course List (see below), according to these rules:
1. At least 3 credit hours in Chinese language at the 3301
(Advanced I) level or above
2. At least 15 credit hours of courses from China
Concentration
3. Up to 13 credit hours of Chinese language courses may be
applied to the total 18 credit hours

Minor in Japanese Language and Culture
The minor in Japanese language and culture is anchored by
a firm foundation in language study that is complemented
by electives in art, history, literature, film and media, politics,
and religion. Students cannot combine the Japanese language
and culture minor with other minors within the Asian Studies
program.
For the minor in Japanese language and culture, students
must complete at least 18 total credit hours from the Asian
Studies Course List (see below), according to these rules:
1. At least 3 credit hours in Japanese language at the 3301
(Advanced I) level or above

79

2. At least 15 credit hours of courses from Japan
Concentration
3. Up to 13 credit hours of Japanese language courses may be
applied to the total 18 credit hours

Minor in South Asian Language and Culture
The minor in South Asian language and culture is anchored by
a firm foundation in language study that is complemented by
electives in art, history, literature, film and media, politics, and
religion. Students cannot combine the South Asian language
and culture minor with other minors within the Asian Studies
program.
For the minor in South Asian language and culture,
students must complete at least 18 total credit hours from the
Asian Studies course list (see below), according to these rules:
1. At least 3 credit hours in Hindi-Urdu language at the 3301
(Advanced I) level or above
2. At least 15 credit hours of courses from South Asia
Concentration
3. Up to 13 credit hours of Hindi-Urdu language courses may
be applied to the total 18 credit hours
Asian Studies Course List
All courses on this list count toward the credit-hour requirements for the major and the minors within the Asian Studies
program. Their eligibility for specific requirements within the
major and minors is indicated by the following codes:
China Concentration = CC
Japan Concentration = JC
South Asia Concentration = SA
Asian Perspectives = AP
History Survey Course = HS
Humanities Course = HU
Social Science Course = SS
Any given course may be applied to only one category of
requirement even if it may be eligible for more than one.
Courses marked with an * require approval from the Asian
Studies program director or director of undergraduate studies.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.
Chinese Language Courses
CHIN 1011. Basic Chinese (CC)
CHIN 1012. Basic Chinese (CC)
CHIN 1101. Elementary Chinese I (CC)
CHIN 1102. Elementary Chinese II (CC)
CHIN 1231. Calligraphy (CC, HU)
CHIN 2201. Intermediate Chinese I (CC)
CHIN 2202. Intermediate Chinese II (CC)
CHIN 2211. Chinese for Heritage Learners I (CC)
CHIN 2212. Chinese for Heritage Learners II (CC)
CHIN 3301. Advanced Chinese I (CC)
CHIN 3302. Advanced Chinese II (CC)
CHIN 3302W. Advanced Chinese II (CC)
CHIN 3851. Independent Study (CC)*
CHIN 3852. Independent Study (CC)*
CHIN 4401. Business Chinese I (CC)
CHIN 4402. Business Chinese II (CC)
CHIN 4403. Readings in Modern Chinese Media (CC)
CHIN 4404. Readings in Modern Chinese Media (CC)
CHIN 4405. Classical Chinese Literature and Philosophy. (CC, HU)
CHIN 4406. Readings in Modern Literary Chinese (CC, HU)

A&S

80
Hindi-Urdu Language Courses
HNUR 1101. Elementary Hindi-Urdu I (SA)
HNUR 1102. Elementary Hindi-Urdu II (SA)
HNUR 2201. Intermediate Hindi-Urdu I (SA)
HNUR 2202. Intermediate Hindi-Urdu II (SA)
HNUR 3301. Advanced Hindi-Urdu I (SA)
HNUR 3302. Advanced Hindi-Urdu II (SA)
HNUR 3851. Independent Study (SA)*
HNUR 3852. Independent Study (SA)*
Japanese Language Courses
JAPN 1011. Basic Japanese I (JC)
JAPN 1012. Basic Japanese II (JC)
JAPN 1101. Elementary Japanese I (JC)
JAPN 1102. Elementary Japanese II (JC)
JAPN 2201. Intermediate Japanese I (JC)
JAPN 2202. Intermediate Japanese II (JC)
JAPN 2232. Japanese through Manga (JC)
JAPN 3301. Advanced Japanese I (JC)
JAPN 3302. Advanced Japanese II (JC)
JAPN 3851. Independent Study (JC)*
JAPN 3852. Independent Study (JC)*
JAPN 3891. Special Topics in Advanced Japanese (JC)
Asian Studies
ASIA 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar*
ASIA 1201. Writing Southeast Asia (AP, HU)
ASIA 1680. Inside China (CC, SS)
ASIA 2100W. Fashioning the Self: Coming of Age and Asian Modernities
(AP, HU)
ASIA 2210W. Hollywood Hanoi (HU)
ASIA 2511. Popular Culture in Modern Japan (JC, HU)
ASIA 2512. Explorations of Japanese Animation (JC, HU)
ASIA 2513W. Media Monsters in Contemporary Japan (JC, HU)
ASIA 2560. Current Japan–U.S. Relations (JC, SS)
ASIA 2605. Romancing the Nation in Modern Chinese Literature (CC, HU)
ASIA 2606. Martial Tradition in Chinese Literature (CC, HU)
ASIA 2607. Self and Society in Pre-modern Chinese Literature (CC, HU)
ASIA 2608. Chinese Drama: 13th to 20th Centuries (CC, HU)
ASIA 2609W. Writing and Gender in Traditional China (CC, HU)
ASIA 2630. Chinese Medicine (CC, SS)
ASIA 3151. The Third World and Literature (AP, HU)
ASIA 3633. Self-Cultivation in Ancient China (CC, HU)
ASIA 3851. Independent Study*
ASIA 3852. Independent Study*
ASIA 3891. Special Topics*
ASIA 3892. Special Topics*
ASIA 3980. Junior Honors Readings*
ASIA 4998. Honors Research*
ASIA 4999. Honors Research*
Cinema and Media Arts
CMA 3892. Special Topics in the Study of Film*
English
ENGL 1260W. Introduction to Literary and Cultural Analysis (AP, HU)*
ENGL 2319W. World Literature, Modern (SA, AP, HU)*
ENGL 3662. Asian American Literature (AP, HU)*
ENGL 3681. Colonial and Post-Colonial Literature (SA, AP, HU)*
History
HIST 1050. East Asia since 1800 (AP, HS)
HIST 1060. Premodern China (CC, HS)
HIST 1070. China from Empire to the People’s Republic (CC, HS)
HIST 1080. Premodern Japan (JC, HS)
HIST 1090. Modern Japan (JC, HS)
HIST 1160. Modern South Asia (SA, HS)
HIST 1161. India Before Europe (SA, HS)
HIST 1881. The Body in Modern Japanese Culture (JC, HU)
HIST 1882W. Japan Through Historical Fiction (JC, HU)
HIST 2100. Politics and Catastrophe in Modern China (CC, SS)

vanderbilt university
HIST 2105. Chinese Thought (CC, HU)
HIST 2110. Crisis Simulation in East Asia (AP, SS)
HIST 2111. U.S.–Asia Relations (AP, SS)
HIST 2115. Play and Pleasure in Early Modern Japan (JC, HU)
HIST 2119. The Pacific War in Cinematic Memory (JC, HU)
HIST 2120. Japan’s War and Postwar, 1931-1989 (JC, SS)
HIST 2140. The Mughal World (SA, SS)
HIST 2145. Religion and Politics in South Asia (SA, AP, SS)
HIST 2150. India and the Indian Ocean (SA, AP, SS)
HIST 3090 Tokyo: History and Image (JC, SS)
HIST 3110. Christianity in China (CC, SS)
HIST 3112. China and the World (CC, SS)
HIST 3220W. Images of India (SA, HU)
History of Art
HART 1200. Arts of East Asia (AP, HU)
HART 1205. Arts of South and Southeast Asia (SA, AP, HU)
HART 1220. History of Asian Architecture (AP, HU)
HART 2110. Arts of China (CC, HU)
HART 2130. Arts of Japan (JC, HU)
HART 2150. East Asian Architecture and Gardens (AP, HU)
HART 2170. Religion and Politics in South and Southeast Asian Art (SA,
AP, HU)
HART 2175. Modern and Contemporary Indian Architecture (AP, HU)
HART 3112. The Arts of China during the Liao-Song Period (CC, HU)
HART 3140. Healing and Art in East Asia. (AP, HU)
HART 3164W. Art of Buddhist Relic and Reliquary (AP, HU)
HART 3172. Himalayan Art: Art of the Divine Abode (AP, HU)
HART 3174. The South Asian Temple (SA, AP, HU)
Human and Organizational Development – International
Leadership and Policy
HODI 3260. Education in the Asia-Pacific Region: Development, Reform,
and Innovation (AP, SS)
Medicine, Health, and Society
MHS 2310. Chinese Society and Medicine (CC, SS)
Political Science
PSCI 2216. The Chinese Political System (CC, SS)
PSCI 3894. Selected Topics in Comparative Politics (SA, SS)*
Religious Studies
RLST 1500. Introduction to Islam (AP, HU)
RLST 1637. Religions of Tibet and the Himalaya (AP, HU)
RLST 1700. Religions in China (CC, HU)
RLST 1710. Religions of Japan (JC, HU)
RLST 2644. Buddhist Traditions (AP, HU)
RLST 2664. Foundations of Hindu Traditions (AP, HU)
RLST 3561. Islam in South Asia (SA, HU)
RLST 3650. Classical Philosophies of India (SA, HU)
RLST 3669. Sacred Space in the Tibetan World (AP, HU)
RLST 3670W. Buddhism and the State (AP, HU)
RLST 3747. Daoist Tradition (AP, HU)
RLST 3749. Zen Buddhism (AP, HU)
RLST 3753. East Asian Buddhism (AP, HU)
RLST 3775. Chinese Religions through Stories (CC, HU)
RLST 4665. Mythologies and Epics of South Asia (SA, HU)
RLST 4666. Devotional Traditions of South Asia: Hindu, Muslim, Sikh (SA,
AP, HU)
RLST 4774. Japanese Mythology (JC, HU)

Asian Studies
Course descriptions begin on page 149.

Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they

College of Arts and Science / Biochemistry and Chemical Biology

previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.

81

Mathematics — MATH 1200 or 1300 and MATH 1201 or 1301
Physics — PHYS 1501 or 1601, PHYS 1502 or 1602,
PHYS 1501L or 1601L, and PHYS 1502L or 1602L
Note: These credit hours do not count toward the major. AP credit
may satisfy some of these requirements.
Fundamental Core Courses for all Tracks (12 credit hours)

Biochemistry and
Chemical Biology
DIRECTORS Brian O. Bachmann, Brandt F. Eichman
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Michelle Sulikowski
Advisory Committee
PROFESSORS Lawrence J. Marnett (Chemistry), Douglas G. McMahon
(Biological Sciences), David Cliffel (Chemistry), David W. Wright
(Chemistry), John York (Biochemistry)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Bruce M. Damon (Radiology and Radiological
Sciences)
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Lauren Parker Jackson (Biological Sciences)
SENIOR LECTURER Cynthia T. Brame (Biological Sciences)

THE study of chemical processes within living systems is an
interdisciplinary enterprise that spans the fields of chemistry,
molecular and cellular biology, biophysics, and engineering. Chemical biology and biochemistry use chemical insight,
techniques, and tools to study or manipulate biological systems.
They are the cornerstones of medical technology and therapeutics. To provide students with training in modern principles
at a chemistry-biology interface, Vanderbilt’s interdisciplinary
major in biochemistry and chemical biology incorporates
expertise from multiple departments in the university. Students
receive a broad background in the natural sciences (chemistry,
biology, physics) and mathematics, followed by fundamental
core training in principles of biochemistry and chemical biology that involves both theoretical and laboratory course work.
Students then pursue an area of emphasis in either biochemistry or chemical biology through upper-level elective courses.
Students participate in independent research in laboratories of
biochemistry and chemical biology faculty. Additional research
experience is available in the Honors Program.

Program of Concentration
The biochemistry and chemical biology major tracks share
fundamental core elements but have a distinct set of foundational courses, track-specific electives, and laboratory
requirements. All students are required to complete a set of
basic science and mathematics courses. The major consists of
32 credit hours beyond these basic science and mathematics
courses. All students complete 12 credit hours of core courses,
14 credit hours of either biochemistry or chemical biology
track, and 6 credit hours of general electives. For suggested
paths of completion, see the Biochemistry and Chemical Biology program website.
Required Math and Science Courses for Both Tracks
(38 credit hours)

Biological Sciences — BSCI 1510, 1511, 1510L, and either
1511L or 1512L
Chemistry — CHEM 2221 or 2211, CHEM 2222 or 2212,
CHEM 2221L and CHEM 2222L

BSCI 2520, CHEM 3710, CHEM 3310, CHEM 4965

Tracks (14 credit hours)
Biochemistry Track

Biochemistry Foundations (3 credit hours) — BSCI 4265
Biochemistry Electives (9 credit hours) — BCB 2101, BCB
4320, BSCI 2201, BSCI 2210, CHEM 2100, CHEM 4720
Laboratory (2 credit hours) — BCB 3201
Chemical Biology Track

Chemical Biology Foundations (5 credit hours) — CHEM
2100 and 2100L, BCB 2101
Chemical Biology Electives (6 credit hours) — BCB 4320,
BSCI 4265, CHEM 4720
Chemical Biology Laboratory (3 credit hours) — BCB 3201,
CHEM 4966
General Electives (6 credit hours)

Electives may be chosen from any of the following:
BCB 2101, BCB 3101, 3201, 4320; BME 2200, 3000, 4400,
4410, 4500; BSCI 2201, 2210, 3230, 3234, 3243, 3245, 3247,
3252, 3256, 3270, 4265, 4266, 4274; CHEM 2100, 3020,
3220, 3300, 3310, 4230, 4720, 4966; CS 1101, 1103, 2204;
NSC 2201, 3260, 3269, 3274, 3891, 4961
Courses taken to fulfill Track requirements are not eligible for
elective credit.

Honors Program
Students in either Biochemistry or Chemical Biology track
may apply to the Honors Program if they hold a minimum
cumulative GPA of 3.3 and a GPA of at least 3.4 in courses that
count toward the major at the start of their junior year. The
purpose of the Honors Program is to provide students with an
intensive independent research experience in a host laboratory.
In addition to meeting the requirements of the BCB major,
Honors candidates must complete two semesters (3 credit
hours each semester) of Honors Research (BCB 4999). Upon
entering the program at the start of the junior year, candidates
assemble a committee of the major research adviser and two
additional faculty members appropriate to the area of research.
As part of the research course work, the candidate will write an
honors thesis. At the end of the graduating semester, Honors
candidates must submit a written thesis and give an oral
defense of their research.
Course descriptions begin on page 151 for Biological Sciences,
page 153 for Chemical Biology, and page 153 for Chemistry.

A&S

82

vanderbilt university

Biological Sciences
CHAIR Douglas G. McMahon
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES TBD
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Katherine L. Friedman
PROFESSORS EMERITI Burton J. Bogitsh, Clint E. Carter, Robert Kral,
Wallace M. LeStourgeon, David E. McCauley, Terry L. Page, Charles
K. Singleton, Gerald J. Stubbs, Dean P. Whittier, Robley C. Williams Jr.
PROFESSORS Kendal S. Broadie, Kenneth C. Catania, Brandt F.
Eichman, Todd R. Graham, Carl H. Johnson, Douglas G. McMahon,
James G. Patton, Antonis Rokas, Laurence J. Zwiebel
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS D. Kilpatrick Abbot, Seth R. Bordenstein,
Katherine L. Friedman, Daniel J. Funk, Julian F. Hillyer
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS John Anthony Capra, Nicole Creanza,
Lauren Parker Jackson, Jared T. Nordman, Maulik R. Patel, Lars
Plate, Ann Tate
SENIOR LECTURERS Steve J. Baskauf, Amanda R. Benson, Cynthia T.
Brame, A. Denise Due-Goodwin, Mark A. Woelfle

The biological sciences encompass the study of living organisms and life processes at all levels: ecosystems, populations,
individual organisms, tissues, cells, subcellular structures, and
molecules. The Department of Biological Sciences offers courses
that address all of these levels and programs of study for undergraduates and for graduate students seeking the Ph.D.
For undergraduates, the department offers three majors
and a minor. All three majors have honors tracks. The Biological Sciences (BioSci) major is designed for the student seeking
a broad base in the biological sciences, though it is a highly
flexible program that allows a certain amount of specialization
in upper-level courses. The Molecular and Cellular Biology
(MCB) major is designed for students with an interest in
developing an in-depth understanding of how living systems
function at the molecular and cellular levels, with upper-level
course options ranging in content from biophysics and biochemistry to developmental biology, and to molecular aspects
of evolution and of toxicology. The Ecology, Evolution, and
Organismal Biology (EEOB) major is designed for students
with an interest in the areas of biology that span genomics,
ecology, evolutionary biology, comparative genomics, organismal biology, and conservation biology. The department also
offers a minor in biological sciences for students majoring
in other disciplines. Interested students should consult the
appropriate director of undergraduate studies.
The department offers undergraduates opportunities for
engaging in faculty-led research projects for course credit.
Students may receive an introduction to the workings of a
scientific laboratory through an internship, or a more intensive,
hands-on experience in directed or independent laboratory
research. Students on the honors track of any of the three
majors carry out a major honors research project and write an
honors thesis. More information about the majors and minor
offered by the department, the honors track of each major, and
research opportunities open to undergraduates is available at
our website: as.vanderbilt.edu/biosci.

General Requirements
All students in programs of concentration offered by the
Department of Biological Sciences must take two semesters
of general chemistry and lab (Chemistry 1601–1602 and
1601L–1602L) and two semesters of organic chemistry and lab
(Chemistry 2221–2222 and 2221L–2222L). It is strongly recommended that students in all three majors take one year of calculus or calculus/statistics and one year of physics. A total of

30 hours of Biological Sciences courses, including the 8 hours
of 1510–1511 and 1510L and either 1511L or 1512L, are required
in all majors. All Biological Sciences courses count toward
the major except 1100, 1105, and 1111. Below is a listing of the
required courses for the Biological Sciences (BioSci) major, for
the Molecular and Cellular Biology (MCB) major, and for the
Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology (EEOB) major.
Students with specialized interests within either of the specialized majors may substitute one of the intermediate courses
with an upper-level course with the permission of the director
of undergraduate studies and the Biological Sciences Curriculum Committee. (Intermediate Biological Sciences courses:
2201, 2201L, 2205, 2210, 2210L, 2218, 2219, 2238, 2238L, 2520).
Students may declare only one of the majors offered by the
Department of Biological Sciences; double or triple majors within
the department are not permitted.
For honors in all three majors, additional requirements must
be met: (a) normally a minimum GPA of 3.30 in courses that
count toward the major; (b) at least 10 of the 30 hours of Biological Sciences course work must be directed/independent research
with a minimum of 8 hours being honors research (BSCI 4999);
(c) an honors thesis and oral defense. For students in the MCB
major, 4265 or 4266 must be taken for 3 credit hours; an alternate advanced course may be substituted with the permission of
the director of undergraduate studies. For students in the EEOB
major, one of the following courses must be taken for 3 credit
hours: 2238, 3230, 3234, 3247, 3270, 3272. For the BioSci major, at
least two lecture courses must be from the following for 3 credit
hours: 3230, 3234, 3236, 3243, 3245, 3247, 3252, 3254, 3256, 3270,
4265, 4266.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Biological Sciences (BioSci)
At least 30 credit hours satisfying the general requirements
above, and including the following:
1. Introductory Courses: 1510/1510L and 1511/1511L or 1512L
2. Intermediate Courses:
a. 2205, 2210
b. one additional intermediate course: 2201, 2218, 2219, 2238,
or 2520
3. Laboratory: Two laboratory courses (2201L, 2210L, 2218,
2219, or 2238L, or one lab course and two semesters of
directed and/or independent research (BSCI 3861, 3961,
4999).
4. Seminar/Independent Studies: A minimum of 2 credit
hours of 3850, 3861, 3961, 3965a–3965b, or 4999 is required.
Only one seminar course (3965) may count toward the
major. A total of no more than 6 credit hours of 3850, 3861,
and 3961 may be counted toward the major.
For students intending to perform honors research, at least
two lecture courses must be from the following: 3230, 3233, 3234,
3236, 3243, 3245, 3247, 3252, 3254, 3256, 3270, 3272, 4265, 4266.

College of Arts and Science / Chemistry

Program of Concentration in Molecular and Cellular
Biology (MCB)
At least 30 credit hours satisfying the general requirements
above, and including the following:
1. Introductory Courses: 1510/1510L, 1511/1511L or 1512L
2. Intermediate Courses: 2201, 2210, 2520 and either 2201L or
2210L
3. Laboratory: One additional laboratory course (2201L, 2210L,
2218, 2219, or 2238L), or two semesters of directed and/or
independent research (BSCI 3861, 3961, 4999).
4. Seminar/Independent Studies: A minimum of 2 credit
hours of 3850, 3861, 3961, 3965, or 4999 is required. Only
one seminar course (3965a–3965b) may count toward the
major. A total of no more than 6 credit hours of 3850, 3861,
and 3961 may be counted toward the major.
Of the remaining courses, at least two must be from the following: 2205, 2243, 3230, 3234, 3236, 3245, 3247, 3252, 3256, 3270,
3272, 4265, 4299.
For students intending to perform honors research in
the MCB major, 4265 or 4266 must be taken; an alternate
advanced lecture course may be substituted with the permission of the director of undergraduate studies.

Program of Concentration in Ecology, Evolution, and
Organismal Biology (EEOB)
At least 30 credit hours satisfying the general requirements
above, and including the following:
1. Introductory Courses: 1510/1510L and 1511/1511L or 1512L
2. Intermediate Courses: 2205 and 2210; and either 2218 or
2219 or 2238. If a student takes 2238 and neither 2218 nor
2219, then either 2210L or 2238L will be required as well.
3. Laboratory: One additional laboratory course (2201L, 2210L,
2218, 2219, or 2238L), or two semesters of directed and/or
independent research (BSCI 3861, 3961, 4999).
4. Seminar/Independent Studies: A minimum of 2 credit
hours of 3850, 3861, 3961, 3965a–3965b, or 4999 is required.
Only one seminar course (3965) may count toward the
major. A total of no more than 6 credit hours of 3850, 3861,
and 3961 may be counted toward the major.
Of the remaining courses, at least two must be from the
following: 3230, 3233, 3234, 3236, 3239, 3247, 3270, 3272, 4266;
or 2218, 2219, or 2238 if not used for the intermediate course
requirement.
For students intending to perform honors research in the
EEOB major, one of the following courses must be taken: 3230,
3234, 3236, 3247, 3270, 3272.

Minor in Biological Sciences
A minor in biological sciences requires a minimum of 18 hours
that include BSCI 1510–1511b; 1510L and either 1511L or 1512L;
2210; and one other intermediate course. No more than two
credit hours of 3860, 3861, 3850, and 3961 may be counted
toward the minor.
Course descriptions begin on page 151.

83

Chemistry
CHAIR David E. Cliffel
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Adam K. List
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Carmelo J. Rizzo
PROFESSORS EMERITI Robert V. Dilts, Larry C. Hall, Thomas M. Harris,
David M. Hercules, Melvin D. Joesten, Joel Tellinghuisen, David L.
Tuleen
PROFESSORS Brian O. Bachmann, Darryl J. Bornhop, Richard M. Caprioli,
Walter J. Chazin, David E. Cliffel, Stephen W. Fesik, Timothy P. Hanusa,
Frederick R. Haselton, B. Andes Hess Jr., Jeffrey N. Johnston, Craig
W. Lindsley, Terry P. Lybrand, H. Charles Manning, Lawrence J. Marnett,
Clare McCabe, Hassane S. Mchaourab, John A. McLean, Jens Meiler,
Prasad L. Polavarapu, Carmelo J. Rizzo, Sandra J. Rosenthal, Sean B.
Seymore, Michael P. Stone, Gary A. Sulikowski, David W. Wright
ADJUNCT PROFESSORS Natalie Arnett, Glenroy Dean Martin
ADJOINT PROFESSORS Norma Dunlap, Amy-Joan Ham, Rongson
Pongdee, Lidia Smentek
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Andrew Link, Renã Robinson
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Lauren E. Buchanan, Janet E. Macdonald,
Lars Plate, Nathan D. Schley, Steven D. Townsend
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURERS Adam K. List, Michelle M. Sulikowski
SENIOR LECTURERS Alissa Hare, Shawn T. Phillips, Craig G. Tainter, Tara
D. Todd, Susan Verberne-Sutton
LECTURER Borislav Ivanov

THE Department of Chemistry seeks to provide a sound
education in the fundamentals of modern chemistry as well as
exposure to cutting-edge research and contemporary instrumentation in the field. This is accomplished by providing
students with a solid background in the disciplines of organic,
analytical, inorganic, biological, and physical chemistry. The
core courses in these areas, which are supported by a variety of
practical experimental experiences in the laboratory, provide students with the skills needed to think critically about
chemistry. After these core courses, students delve deeper
into an area of their choice. Recognizing the importance of
research, which integrates and makes sense of our collective
body of knowledge, we encourage students to participate in
undergraduate research. The chemistry major at Vanderbilt
University meets the guidelines for the American Chemical
Society approved program of study in chemistry.

NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Chemistry
The chemistry program is organized into four parts. The first
part is a general chemistry course sequence (CHEM 1601–1602
and 1601L–1602L or AP credit) to serve as an entry point into
the major. The second part consists of foundation courses
in the five major disciplines of chemistry: analytical (2100),
biochemistry (BSCI 2520), inorganic (3010), organic (2221–2222
or 2211–2212), and physical (3300 or 3310). The third part of
the chemistry major consists of completing 8 credit hours
of laboratory past 1601L–1602L. Four credit hours are from
laboratory courses (2221L–2222L, 2100L, and 3315) associated
with foundation courses. There are also 6 credit hours of a
capstone laboratory (4965–4966) designed to provide advanced
laboratory experience. The fourth part of the major consists of
completing a minimum of 6 credit hours of in-depth chemistry
courses. These in-depth courses build upon the content of foundation courses or integrate concepts from these foundational
disciplines.

A&S

84

vanderbilt university

Concentration in Chemistry
Required Non-chemistry Courses
One year of calculus (MATH 1300-1301 is preferred)
PHYS: Both 1501–1502 and 1501L–1502L,
or both 1601–1602 and 1601L–1602L,
or 1901–1902
Required Chemistry Courses
Cr. Hrs. toward major
Chem 1601–1602 & 1601L–1602L or AP credit
0
Chem 2221–2222 (or 2211–2212) & 2221L–2222L
8
Chem 2100 & 2100L
4
Chem 3300 or 3310
3
Chem 3315
1
BSCI 2520
3
Chem 3010
3
*Two in-depth chemistry courses
6
Chem 4965–4966
6
Minimum Credit Hours for Chemistry Major
34
* In-depth chemistry courses include all 2000-level chemistry and higher courses not explicitly required, except for
CHEM 3600 and 3980–4980–4999. Other in-depth chemistry
courses are Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 3200 and
3250, and Earth and Environmental Sciences 4600, and any
5000-level chemistry lecture courses. (Qualified seniors interested in graduate-level courses must obtain approval from the
course instructor, their adviser, and the director of graduate
studies in chemistry. Further details are found in the Academic
Policies for the College of Arts and Science.) A maximum of 3
credit hours of chemistry research (3860) may be counted as
in-depth chemistry course hours.
Additional math courses, such as Math 2300 and Math 2820,
are highly recommended for the chemistry major.

Options for Concentration in Chemistry
In-depth chemistry courses can be chosen so as to define a
focus area within chemistry. Students should consult with
their major adviser about focus area options, or to formulate
an individualized focus area option. Further descriptions of
these options and other recommended courses can be found in
the chemistry major handbook on the chemistry department
homepage.
Chemical Biology Focus. The role of chemical processes in
biological systems is fundamental to chemical biology. The
journal Nature Chemical Biology defines chemical biology as
“the use of chemistry to advance a molecular understanding of
biology and the harnessing of biology to advance chemistry.”
Chemical biology builds upon the disciplines of medicinal
chemistry, biochemistry, pharmacology, genetics, bioorganic
and organic chemistry. Suggested in-depth chemistry electives:
3020, 3710, 3860, 4210, 4720.
Chemical Sciences Focus. This option provides a broad
foundation of chemistry, permitting flexibility in future career
pathways and providing an excellent preparation for positions
in chemical industry and for graduate programs in chemistry.
Suggested in-depth chemistry electives: 3120, 3300, 3310, 3860.
Environmental Chemistry Focus. Environmental chemistry concerns the chemical phenomena that occur in nature.
Environmental chemistry spans atmospheric, aquatic, and
soil chemistry with a reliance on analytical chemistry for
methods of analysis. Environmental chemistry can be applied
to the understanding of issues such as ground water pollution,
wastewater treatment, ozone depletion, and greenhouse gas

emissions. Suggested in-depth chemistry electives: 3120, 3300,
3310, 3860, EES 4600.
Materials Chemistry Focus. Materials chemistry is concerned
with designing and synthesizing new materials with specific
useful properties and determining the relationships between
physical properties and the composition and structure of these
new materials. Materials chemistry encompasses all size regimes
from bulk to nanoscale. Synthetic chemistry (inorganic and
organic), physical chemistry, and analytical chemistry are all
important components of this field. Suggested in-depth chemistry electives: 3120, 3630, 2610, 3310, 2610, 3860, 5320, 5610, 5620.

Minor in Chemistry
The minor in chemistry requires 18 credit hours of course work,
including 4 credit hours from 1602 and 1602L or AP credit, and
14 credit hours selected from any of the courses acceptable for
the major in chemistry.

Honors in Chemistry
Students with an overall GPA of at least 3.3 and a GPA of at least
3.4 in chemistry courses at the start of their junior year wishing to do honors will register for the honors research courses
(CHEM 3980, 4980, 4999—each is 2 credit hours) beginning
spring semester junior year. The CHEM 4965 and 4966 requirements are waived in lieu of the CHEM 3980, 4980, and 4999
registrations. Honors candidates must present a thesis on the
research done under CHEM 3980, 4980, and 4999 and pass an
oral examination. Additional information may be found in the
chapter on Special Programs in the College.

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in chemistry at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog. One semester of
the CHEM 4965–4966 sequence will be considered fulfilled by
completing the Peabody student teaching requirements.

Introductory Courses
Introductory chemistry is offered in two different sequences,
each with its own laboratory. Only one set of these courses
may be taken for credit.
1. Chemistry 1010, 1010L. Intended for liberal arts students
who are not planning to take any additional chemistry courses.
It treats chemistry in a nonmathematical fashion, with some
historical and philosophical features. Not for science and
engineering students.
2. Chemistry 1601–1602. Designed for engineering, science,
and premedical students. This course, which must be taken
simultaneously with 1601L–1602L, serves as preparation for students intending to major in chemistry, biology, physics, or earth
and environmental sciences. It is a more rigorous, mathematical
approach to chemistry and a prerequisite for organic and other
chemistry courses. It is not intended for liberal arts students
taking a science course only to fulfill AXLE requirements.
Course descriptions begin on page 153.

College of Arts and Science / Classical and Mediterranean Studies

Cinema and Media Arts
DIRECTOR Jennifer Fay
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR Jonathan Waters
PROFESSORS Jay Clayton, Lutz Koepnick
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Jennifer Fay, Claire Sisco King, James
McFarland, Andrea Mirabile
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Se Young Kim, Jonathan Rattner, Haerin Shin
SENIOR LECTURERS Madeleine Casad, Jonathan Waters
WRITERS IN RESIDENCE Diana Grisanti, Stephen Moulds
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Joy Calico (Music), Colin Dayan (English), Gerald Figal
(History), Sam B. Girgus (English), Yoshikuni Igarashi (History), Daniel
Levin (Psychology, Peabody), Kelly Oliver (Philosophy), Lynn T. Ramey
(French), T. Sharpley-Whiting (African American and Diaspora Studies
and French), Benigno Trigo (Spanish), Mark A. Wollaeger (English)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Vanessa Beasley (Communication Studies),
Phillip Franck (Theatre), Jay Geller (Divinity School), Jon Hallquist
(Theatre), Terryl Hallquist (Theatre), Stanley Link (Music), Letizia
Modena (French and Italian), Emanuelle Oliveira (Portuguese), Vesna
Pavlovic (Art)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Peter Lorge (History), Anand Taneja
(Religious Studies)
SENIOR LECTURER Scott Juengel (English)

CINEMA and Media Arts offers an interdisciplinary major and
minor that combine the practice of filmmaking with the study
of film and media theory and history. Emphasizing cinema as
both a modern aesthetic form and a hands-on cultural practice, the program trains students for careers in film and media
production, communications, academic media studies, and
community and social relations. While the program encourages
new ways of thinking, looking, and making, it also develops
the traditional learning skills of a liberal education. A core
curriculum is comprised of film and media theory, history, and
filmmaking. The major concludes with a senior seminar.

85

Honors Program
The Honors Program in Cinema and Media Arts offers
excelling students the opportunity to undertake a high-level
independent research and/or creative project during their
senior year. Projects must be rigorous and demonstrate a
student’s ability to sustain an argument, an aesthetic principle,
or a narrative arc in a substantial form. For admission to the
Honors Program, students must have and maintain until
graduation a cumulative grade point average of 3.3 and a grade
point average of 3.5 in courses counting toward the major. The
student must submit an application to the program director
outlining the thesis topic. In addition to completing the major
requirements listed above, during the senior year the student is
required to register for Cinema and Media Arts 4998 (3 credit
hours) and 4999 (3 credit hours) in order to complete the
thesis. An oral examination on the thesis and its area is to be
completed during the final semester of undergraduate study.

Minor in Cinema and Media Arts
The minor consists of 15 credit hours. The requirements are as
follows:
1. 1500 (Fundamentals of Film and Video Production).
2. 1600 (Introduction to Film and Media Studies).
3. One course in intermediate filmmaking: 2250 (16mm Filmmaking); 2260 (Digital Production Workshop).
4. One course in intermediate cinema studies: 2300 (Film and
Media Theory); 2400 (History of World Cinema).
5. One elective: 2600W (Advanced Screenwriting); 3891
(Special Topics in Film and Video Production); 3892
(Special Topics in the Study of Film); 3893 (Special Topics
in National Cinemas and Movements).
Course descriptions begin on page 156.

NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Cinema and Media Arts
The CMA major consists of 30 credit hours. The requirements
are as follows:
CORE REQUIREMENTS
1. 1500 (Fundamentals of Film and Video Production).
2. 1600 (Introduction to Film and Media Studies).
3. 2250 (16mm Filmmaking).
4. 2260 (Digital Production Workshop).
5. 2300 (Film and Media Theory).
6. 2400 (History of World Cinema).
7. 3891 (Special Topics in Film and Video Production).
8. 3892 (Special Topics in the Study of Film).
9. Senior Seminar—4961 or 4962.
10. One elective: 2600W (Advanced Screenwriting); 3891
(Special Topics in Film and Video Production); 3892 (Special
Topics in the Study of Film); 3893 (Special Topics in National
Cinemas and Movements). 3891 and 3892 may be repeated
for elective credit provided there is no duplication in topic.

Classical and
Mediterranean Studies
DIRECTOR Joseph L. Rife
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Daniel P. Solomon
PROFESSORS EMERITI Robert Drews, F. Carter Philips, Jack. M. Sasson,
Barbara Tsakirgis, Susan Ford Wiltshire
PROFESSOR William Caferro (Classical and Mediterranean Studies and
History)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Kathy L. Gaca, Joseph L. Rife
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Ari Bryen (Classical and Mediterranean
Studies and History)
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURER Daniel P. Solomon
SENIOR LECTURER Chiara Sulprizio
LECTURER Georgina White
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Thomas A. McGinn (History), David Wasserstein (History
and Jewish Studies)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Betsey Robinson (History of Art)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Mireille M. Lee (History of Art), David
Michelson (Divinity School)

A&S

86

The Program in Classical and Mediterranean Studies offers
students an interdisciplinary perspective on the culture and
history of a region at the crossroads of human civilization
since antiquity. The study of the Mediterranean world examines the influential achievements and legacy of the Greeks
and Romans alongside the emergence and spread of Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam to the East. It also explores the premodern to modern development of southern Europe, North
Africa, and western Asia, which have variously responded to
the ancient and medieval past. The program offers courses in
the history, religion, philosophy, art, literature, society, and
culture of the Mediterranean world. In teaching and research,
the faculty promote the integrated study of past and present
through both written and material sources—textual, artifactual,
visual, spatial—and they embrace analytical techniques in the
digital humanities. Students thus have the opportunity to learn
several ancient and medieval languages of Europe and the
Middle East and to pursue experiential learning overseas, from
intensive modern language study to archaeological fieldwork
to the investigation of evolving cultural and natural landscapes.
Majors in classical and Mediterranean studies are introduced to the distinctive geography and history of the region
but choose their courses in one of three tracks. These tracks
have shared content but offer different viewpoints and training.
Majors who expect to apply for graduate study should work
closely with an adviser to devise an appropriate curriculum.
Students who pursue Classical and Near Eastern Languages
and Cultures investigate one or more ancient to medieval
cultural tradition(s) in the Greco-Roman and Near Eastern
spheres through the study of original texts and their historical
setting, such as Greek tragedy, Latin oratory, Hebrew scripture,
the Qur’an, or early French romance.
Students who pursue Mediterranean Archaeology explore
human diversity and experience from Classical Antiquity to the
Middle Ages through the study of material and visual culture.
They too learn to read textual sources while acquiring the skills
of archaeological and art-historical research.
Students who pursue Mediterranean Studies, the most flexible track for a broad range of interests, can choose to engage
with a variety of ancient, medieval, or modern topics through
focused or comparative study.
The Program in Classical and Mediterranean Studies also
offers a minor in Mediterranean archaeology and a minor in
Mediterranean studies. A student cannot earn more than one
minor in the program.
The Honors Program requires mastery of a language and
the production of a thesis representing advanced, original, and
substantial research.
Students are strongly recommended to pursue study abroad
in the Mediterranean or an adjacent region. The program has
long supported the Intercollegiate Center for Classical Studies,
the American Academy in Rome, and the American School
of Classical Studies in Athens. Many different international
experiences are possible through Vanderbilt-approved semester
programs, Maymesters, research projects, and summer study,
for example, in France, Italy, Greece, and Israel. The program
encourages students to participate in local and regional
conferences, where they can share the results of collaborative
or independent work. Students concentrating on Greece and
Rome who qualify academically are invited to join Eta Sigma
Phi, the national classics honor society.

vanderbilt university
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Classical and Mediterranean
Studies
Students majoring in classical and Mediterranean studies must
take ten courses, including one foundation course (CLAS 1010).
The major is arranged into four tracks. Students must formally
declare track 1–3 at the time the major is declared (track 1 is
advised for students who wish to pursue the Honors track). If
a student is interested in pursuing honors, they may declare
track 4 once admitted to the Honors Program. A score of 4 or
5 on the AP Latin exam earns 3 hours of credit for Latin 2202,
which may be applied toward any of the major tracks. Any
course for which a student has earned credit will count for one
and only one of the requirements or subrequirements for any
of the major tracks or minors.
Track 1: Classical and Near Eastern Languages and Cultures

30–34 total credit hours including:
1. One foundation course: CLAS 1010 (3 credit hours);
2. Language/Literature: Five courses from Course List A (15
credit hours, or 19 credit hours if including ARA 1101–1102);
3. Culture: Four courses from Course Lists B–D numbered
2060 or above (12 credit hours).
Latin courses at the 1000 level do not count toward this
major track. Students who fulfill their language/literature
requirement (#2 above) by completing courses in one language
must, in consultation with the director of undergraduate
studies, earn credit for at least one course in a different cultural
tradition (e.g., Greek, Roman, Jewish, Christian, Islamic) or
period (e.g., ancient, medieval).
Track 2: Mediterranean Archaeology

30–34 total credit hours including:
1. Two foundation courses: CLAS 1010 and 1020 (6 credit
hours);
2. Language/Literature: Two courses from Course List A (6
credit hours, or 10 if including ARA 1101–1102);
3. Method and Theory: One course from Course List E (3
credit hours);
4. Three courses in the history and in the art, architecture,
and archaeology of the ancient to medieval Mediterranean
world, including one from Course List B, one from Course
List C, and one from Course List B or C (9 credit hours);
5. Electives: Two courses from Course Lists A–E or from the
following (6 credit hours):
ANTHROPOLOGY: 1101, Introduction to Anthropology; 1201, Introduction
to Archaeology; 1301, Introduction to Biological Anthropology; 1601, Introduction to Language and Culture; 2211, Archaeology; 2220, Human Landscapes; 2227, Food in the Ancient World; 2370, Death and the Body; 3160,
Anthropologies and Archaeologies of Community; 3161, Colonial Encounter
in the Americas; 3200, Ancient Cities; 3202, The Collapse of Civilizations.

With the permission of the director of undergraduate studies, students may fulfill the method and theory requirement
(#3 above) by completing a program of practical archaeology

College of Arts and Science / Classical and Mediterranean Studies

(e.g., CLAS 3710, 3720, ANTH 3866, participation in an excavation or field survey, an internship in conservation or curation).
No more than 15 credit hours of courses numbered below 2050
may count toward this major track.

87

Minor in Mediterranean Studies
Students are required to complete CLAS 1010 and 15 additional credit hours in courses that count toward Track 3 of the
concentration, of which at least 9 credit hours must be from
courses numbered 2060 or above.

Track 3: Mediterranean Studies

30 total credit hours including:

Approved List of Courses

1. One foundation course: CLAS 1010 (3 credit hours)

A. Ancient to Medieval Mediterranean Languages and Literatures
GREEK: 1101, Beginning Greek I; 1102, Beginning Greek II; 2201, Intermediate Greek I: Classical and Koiné Greek; 2202, Intermediate Greek II:
Homer’s Iliad; 3010, The Greek Orators (3 credit hours); 3020, The Greek
Historians; 3040, Readings in Plato and Aristotle; 3100, The Greek Tragedians; 3110, Greek Lyric Poetry; 3200, Early Christian Writers; 3850,
Independent Study; 3890, Special Topics in Greek Literature.

2. Historical basis: Four courses from Course Lists A–D (12
credit hours);
3. Comparative perspectives: Five courses from Course Lists
A–F (15 credit hours).
Students may apply up to three semesters of one Mediterranean language toward the historical basis requirement of this
major track, including either an ancient to medieval language
in Course List A or Catalan, French, Italian, Portuguese, or
Spanish. French, Italian, Latin, and Spanish courses at the 1000
level do not count toward the major. No more than 12 credit
hours of courses numbered below 2050 may count toward this
major track.
Track 4: Honors Program

The Honors Program in Classical and Mediterranean Studies
offers students a more intensive concentration in their main
field, based on their mastery of languages required for primary
research.
Admission requirements are:

LATIN: 1101, Beginning Latin I; 1102, Beginning Latin II; 1103, Intensive
Elementary Latin; 2201, Intermediate Latin I; 2202, Intermediate Latin II;
3010, The Writings of Caesar; 3020, Cicero and the Humanistic Tradition;
3030, Latin Letters; 3040, The Roman Historians; 3050, Suetonius; 3060,
Tacitus; 3100, Roman Comedy; 3110, Catullus; 3120, Lucretius: De Rerum Natura; 3130, Vergil: The Aeneid; 3140, The Lyric Poetry of Horace;
3150, Latin Elegy; 3160, Ovid; 3170, Roman Satire; 3180, Neronian Writers; 3200, Early Christian Writers; 3850, Independent Study; 3890, Special
Topics in Latin Literature.
ARABIC: ARA 1101, Elementary Arabic I; 1102, Elementary Arabic II; 2201,
Intermediate Arabic I; 3301, Arabic of the Qur’an and Other Classical Texts;
RLST 4593, Advanced Readings in Islamic Tradition.
HEBREW: 1101, Beginning Classical Hebrew I; 1102, Beginning Classical
Hebrew II; 2200, Intermediate Classical Hebrew; 3010, Historical Hebrew
Grammar; 3020, Classical Hebrew Poetry; 3030, West Semitic Inscriptions.

1. Completion of junior year;

UGARITIC: CHEB 2300, Ugaritic.

2. Completion of at least 6 credit hours of work in advanced
language courses (numbered GRK 3010, LAT 3010, CHEB
2300 and above) or 3 credit hours of ARA 3301;

ARAMAIC AND CLASSICAL SYRIAC: ARAM 2400, Introduction to Classical Syriac; 2500, Egyptian Aramaic; CHEB 3030, West Semitic Inscriptions.

3. A cumulative GPA of 3.3, and a GPA of 3.5 in courses that
count toward the major.
Candidates should signal their interest to the director of
undergraduate studies by the beginning of the second semester
of the junior year. Candidates must submit a thesis proposal
for approval by the faculty before they may be admitted to the
Honors Program. In addition to maintaining the stated GPA
throughout the senior year, Honors students must satisfy the
following requirements in order to graduate with honors:
1. Complete an additional 6 credit hours in advanced Greek
or Latin (numbered GRK 3010, LAT 3010, or higher) or an
additional 6 credit hours in one or more advanced Semitic
languages (CHEB 2300, or higher, ARA 3301; CLAS 3300
and 3301 may count toward this requirement).
2. Complete CLAS 4998 and 4999 for 6 credit hours in
addition to the 30–34 credit hours required by the major,
culminating in a written thesis that is defended orally. A
committee of three faculty members (two of whom must
hold sole or joint appointments in the Program in Classical
and Mediterranean Studies) will evaluate the thesis.

Minor in Mediterranean Archaeology
Students are required to complete CLAS 1010, 1020, and 12
additional credit hours in courses that count toward Track 2
of the concentration, of which at least 9 credit hours must be
from courses numbered 2060 or above.

AKKADIAN: CLAS 3300, Elementary Akkadian I; 3301, Elementary Akkadian II.
OLD FRENCH: FREN 3224, Medieval French Literature.
B. Ancient to Medieval Mediterranean History
CLASSICAL AND MEDITERRANEAN STUDIES: 2100, History of the Ancient Near East; 2110, History of Greece to Alexander the Great; 2120,
Greece and the Near East from Alexander to Constantine; 2150, History
of the Roman Republic; 2160, History of the Roman Empire; 2180, The
Mediterranean World from Late Antiquity to the Middle Ages.
HISTORY: 1190, A History of Islam; 1350, Western Civilization to 1700;
1600, European Economic History 1000–1700; 2220, Medieval and Renaissance Italy, 1000–1700; 2230, Medieval Europe, 1000–1350.
C. Ancient to Medieval Mediterranean Art, Architecture, and
Archaeology
CLASSICAL AND MEDITERRANEAN STUDIES: 2200, Archaic and Classical Greek Art and Architecture, 1000 to 400 B.C.E.; 2210, Late Classical
Greek and Hellenistic Art and Architecture; 2250, Roman Art and Architecture; 3200, The Greek City; 3210, The Archaeology of Greek Sanctuaries;
3230, Alexander the Great.
HISTORY OF ART: 2180, Islamic Art and Architecture; 2210, Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt; 2220, Greek Art and Architecture; 2260, The
Art of Pagans, Christians, and Jews; 2270, Early Christian and Byzantine
Art; 2275, The Cross and the Crescent: Byzantine-Islamic Confluences in
Art; 3224, Greek Sculpture; 3226, Greek Vases and Society; 3228, Gender and Sexuality in Greek Art; 3240, Ancient Landscapes.

A&S

88
D. Ancient to Medieval Mediterranean Studies
CLASSICAL AND MEDITERRANEAN STUDIES: 1120, Greek Civilization;
1130, The Greek Myths; 1150, Roman Civilization; 3000, Classical Tradition in America; 3030, Death, Disease, and Health in the Ancient World;
3100, Women, Sexuality, and Family in Ancient Greece and Rome; 3110,
Warfare in the Ancient Mediterranean; 3120, Humor, Ancient to Modern;
3150, Roman Law; 3160, Roman Law and Society; 3190, Augustan
Rome; 3310, Culture of the Ancient Near East; 3315, Literature of the Ancient Near East; 3350, History of Ancient and Medieval Christianity; 3360,
Early Christian Poetry; 3370, History of Syriac Christianity; 3380, Desert
Spirituality in Early Christianity; 3600, Seminar in Digital Humanities; 3710,
Maymester in Greece; 3720, Maymester in Rome.
ENGLISH: 2318, World Literature, Classical.
HISTORY: 2150, Muhammad and Early Islam; 2160, Medicine in Islam;
2170, Islam and the Crusades; 2180, Islamic Narratives, Narratives of Islam;
2190, The Late Empire of Islam; 3210, Muslims, Christians, and Jews in
Medieval Spain.
HISTORY OF ART: 1100, History of Western Art I; 1101, History of Western Architecture I; 2285, Medieval Art; 2290, Gothic Paris; 2310, Italian Art
to 1500; 2325, Great Masters of the Italian Renaissance; 3252, Cities of
the Roman East; 3320, Early Renaissance Florence; 3332, Raphael and
the Renaissance; 3334, Michelangelo’s Life and Works; 3790, Maymester
in Provence.
JEWISH STUDIES: 1200, Classical Judaism: Jews in Antiquity; 1220,
Jews in the Medieval World; 2150, Issues in Rabbinic Literature; 3982,
Topics in Ancient and Medieval Jewish History.
PHILOSOPHY: 2100, Ancient Philosophy; 2101, Hellenistic and Late Ancient Philosophy; 2102, Medieval Philosophy; 3005, Jewish Philosophy;
3006, Islamic Philosophy.
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 1500, Introduction to Islam; 4551, Mysticism in Islam.
E. Archaeological and Art-Historical Method and Theory
ANTHROPOLOGY: 2603, Comparative Writing Systems; 3261, Geographic Information Systems and Remote Sensing; 3260, Ceramic Analysis in Archaeology; 3262, Ethics in Anthropology, Archaeology, and Development; 3344, Genetic Anthropology Lab Techniques; 3372, Human
Osteology; 3866, Archaeological Excavation; 3901, Problems in Anthropological Theory; 4344, Human Evolutionary Genetics.
CLASSICAL AND MEDITERRANEAN STUDIES: 3600, Seminar in Digital
Humanities.
EARTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE: 1030, Oceanography; 1510,
The Dynamic Earth: Introduction to Geological Sciences; 2510, Earth Systems through Time.
HISTORY OF ART: 3810, Exhibiting Historical Art.
F. The Modern Mediterranean World
HISTORY: 1200, The Arab Spring; 3190, Religion, Culture, and Commerce: The World Perspective.
HISTORY OF ART: 2780, History of Western Urbanism; 2782, Storied
Places: History of Landscape Design.
JEWISH STUDIES: 2600, Islam and the Jews.
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 4552, Islam in the Modern World.
Course descriptions begin on page 157.

vanderbilt university

Communication of Science
and Technology
DIRECTOR David A. Weintraub
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Michael Bess (History), Jay Clayton (English), David
J. Ernst (Physics and Astronomy), Richard F. Haglund Jr. (Physics
and Astronomy), Lutz Koepnick (German Studies and Cinema and
Media Arts), Jonathan M. Metzl (Medicine, Health, and Society),
Jeffrey D. Schall (Psychology), Robert J. Scherrer (Physics and
Astronomy), Arleen Tuchman (History), David A. Weintraub (Physics
and Astronomy)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Jennifer M. Fay (Cinema and Media Arts and
English), Jonathan M. Gilligan (Earth and Environmental Sciences),
Suzana Herculano-Houzel (Psychology), Sarah Igo (History),
Ruth Rogaski (History and Asian Studies)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Ole Molvig (History), Laura Stark (Medicine,
Health, and Society)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE OF ENGINEERING
Christopher Rowe (General Engineering)
SENIOR LECTURERS Daniel Morgan (Earth and Environmental
Sciences), Stephen Ornes (Communication of Science and
Technology)

The study of the communication of science and technology
is an interdisciplinary enterprise that draws upon the scientific, engineering, and communication, both oral and written,
resources of Vanderbilt University. The program is designed
for students who have an interest in science and technology
and also are interested in how science and technology are
communicated to the larger world outside science, engineering,
and medicine.
Interested students should contact the director of the
program, David A. Weintraub, Department of Physics and
Astronomy.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Communication of Science
and Technology
Students majoring in the communication of science and technology will be expected to complete a core of courses that are
essential to understanding communication, as well as a coherent program of courses that provide scientific and engineering
background. The major consists of either 38 or 39 credit hours.
Students are strongly encouraged to develop expertise in
a single scientific discipline, either through their course work
within the major or in combination with a minor or second
major in a scientific discipline. Note that a student may count
as many as 6 credit hours as part of both this interdisciplinary
major and a second major. Note also that a minor must count
at least 15 credit hours that are not also included in the major.
A student may only include a maximum of 15 credit hours of
1000-level course work.
1) Written and Oral Communications courses (9 credit hours
from 3 courses)
Three courses, with a minimum 3 credit hours per course,
as follows:

College of Arts and Science / Communication of Science and Technology

a. CSET 2100 (Science Communication Tools and Techniques) or CSET 3890 (Special Topics). If neither course is
offered for two consecutive years, majors may, with approval
of the program director, substitute a course from category ‘1c.’
b. One advanced public-speaking course: CMST 2100
(Argumentation and Debate), CMST 2110 (Persuasion), or
2120 (Organizational and Managerial Communication)
c. One advanced (2000-level or higher) “W” course from
any of the following:
i. any 2000-level or higher “W” course from any Natural Science program (as used here, “Natural Science” includes
all courses identified as “MNS” courses in AXLE except
MATH and PHIL courses)
ii. any 2000-level or higher “W” course from any Engineering program
iii. any 2000-level or higher “W” course from MHS
iv. ENGL 3210 (Intermediate Nonfiction Writing), 3220
(Advanced Nonfiction Writing), ENGL 3728/3728W (Science Fiction), or ENGL 3720/3720W (Literature, Science, and
Technology)
2) Natural Science and Engineering courses (15 credit hours
from five courses)
Five courses (minimum 3 credit hours per course), at least
three of which must be 2000-level or higher Natural Science
courses. (As used here, “Natural Science” includes all courses
identified as MNS courses in AXLE except MATH and PHIL
courses.) The other two courses may be 2000-level or higher
Natural Science courses or courses taken at any level from the
School of Engineering. Students will count 15 credit hours of
Natural Science and/or Engineering courses toward this part of
38- or 39-credit-hour requirement, even if they choose to take
five 4-credit-hour courses. Engineering “research,” “project,”
“design,” “seminar,” “independent study,” and introductory
programming courses (e.g., BME 3860, 3861, 4950, 4951, 4959;
ChBE 4950W, 4951W, 3860, 3861, 4959; CE 3841, 3842, 3843,
4950, 4951, 4900; CS 1101, 1103, 3860, 3861; EECE 3850, 3851,
4950, 4951, 4959; ENGM 3850, 3851, 4951; ES 1115, 0703, 3860;
MSE 3850, 3851; ME 3841, 3842, 3860, 4951, 4959; SC 3841, 3842,
3843, 3851, 3852, 3853) do not count toward this requirement.
Students may count the three 1-credit-hour courses ES 1401,
1402, and 1403 as equivalent to a single 3-credit-hour course if
they earn credit for all three courses. The course UNIV 3279
(Virtual Reality) counts as an Engineering course for purposes
of the CSET major.
3) Statistics (3 credit hours) selected from:
BSCI 3270 (Statistical Methods in Biology)
ECON 1500 (Economic Statistics), 1510 (Intensive Economic Statistics)
MATH 1011 (Probability and Statistical Inference), 2810
(Probability and Statistics for Engineering), 2820 (Introduction
to Probability and Mathematical Statistics)
PSY 2100 (Quantitative Methods)
PSY-PC 2110 (Introduction to Statistical Analysis)
PSY-PC 2120 (Statistical Analysis)
BME 3200 (Analysis of Biomedical Data)
SOC 2100 (Statistics for Social Scientists)
4) One course bridging science, engineering, or medicine and
health with non-science content and issues, including public
policy courses and environmental courses (3 credit hours):

89

ANTH 2109 (Food Politics in America), 3143 (Medical
Anthropology), 3343 (Biology and Culture of Race), 3141
(Anthropology of Healing), 3142 (Medicine, Culture, and the
Body), 3372 (Human Osteology), 4373 (Health and Disease in
Ancient Populations)
ASIA 2630 (Chinese Medicine)
ASTR 2130 (Theories of the Universe)
ECON 2350 (Health Care Policy)
EES 2150 (Science, Risk, and Policy)
ENGL 3730 (Literature and the Environment)
HIST 1480 (The Darwinian Revolution), 1500 (History of
Modern Sciences and Society), 1510 (The Scientific Revolution), 2780 (Superhuman Civilization), 2800 (Modern Medicine), 2810 (Women, Health, and Sexuality), 3040 (Health
and the African American Experience), 3045W (US Eugenics
1865–present), 3050 (Innovation), 3070W (Science, Technology, and Modernity)
MHS — any course except 1111, with the exception of
special topics internship, service learning, research, seminar,
independent study and honors classes
PHIL 3616 (Philosophy and the Natural Sciences)
PSCI 3253 (Ethics and Public Policy), 2255 (Public Policy
Problems), 2256 (Politics of Public Policy)
PSY 3705 (Human Sexuality)
RLST 3921 (Ethics and Ecology), 3941 (Religion, Science,
and Evolution)
SOC 3311 (Climate Change and Society), 3312 (Environment and Development), 3314 (Environmental Inequality and
Justice), 3301 (Society and Medicine), 3315 (Human Ecology
and Society)
UNIV 3278 (Tackling Big Questions with Mobile Cloud
Computing)
WGS 2240 (Introduction to Women’s Health), 2268 (Gender, Race, Justice, and the Environment), 2270 (Ecofeminism:
Theory, Politics, and Action)
5) Electives (8 or 9 credit hours) chosen from:
a. CMA 1500 (Fundamentals of Film and Video Production), 1600 (Introduction to Film and Media Studies), 2100
(Intermediate Filmmaking: Alternate Forms), 2200 (Intermediate Filmmaking: The Fiction Film), 2500W (Screenwriting),
2600W (Advanced Screenwriting), (no more than 2 courses)
b. category 1c (no more than 2 courses)
c. category 2 (no more than 2 courses)
d. category 4 (no more than 2 courses)
e. A combination of at least one hour of CSET 3840
(Directed Study) and at least one hour of CSET 3841 (Project
in Science Writing and Communicating) may be counted
together as a single elective course. No more than 3 credit
hours of CSET 3840 and 3841 may count toward the major.

Internships
Students are encouraged to pursue off-campus summer internships in such places as national parks, NASA, the National
Institutes of Health, or public television stations. If an internship
requires course credit, credit can be earned through Interdisciplinary Studies (INDS) 3881 and 3884 (1 credit hour each); they
must be taken as P/F hours, and do not count toward the major.

Honors Program
CSET Honors is a selective program of individual undergraduate work, supervised by faculty advisers. Honors candidates

A&S

90

propose, research, and write a thesis that demonstrates the ability to communicate science, in depth, to a nonscientific audience.
Requirements for Admission

To be admitted to the Honors Program in CSET, a student
must
1) be a CSET major;
2) have completed at least 30 of the required hours for the
CSET major;
3) have completed one semester of CSET 3840 (1–3 credit
hours) and one semester of CSET 3841 (1–3 credit hours).
With permission of the program director, students may
substitute research experience taken for credit within a
scientific or engineering program for CSET 3840;
4) have a GPA of at least 3.30 in all work previously taken for
credit;
5) have a GPA of at least 3.40 in all courses taken that count
toward completion of the CSET major.
Requirements for Completion (minimum 39 credit hours)

To earn Honors or Highest Honors in CSET, a student must
1) complete the CSET major (minimum 38 credit hours);
2) complete at least one semester of CSET 4998 (1–3 credit
hours);
3) present an oral defense of the written CSET 4998 thesis
before a faculty examination committee;
4) have a GPA of at least 3.30 in all work taken for credit and
3.40 in all courses that count toward the CSET major.
Course of Study

Interested students may apply in the spring of their junior year
or the fall of the senior year. Applicants must have completed
CSET 3840 (or the equivalent) and must have completed or
be enrolled in CSET 3841. The application includes a one- to
two-page proposal of the planned thesis and the signature of
the faculty member who will be the thesis adviser.
Students in the Honors Program sign up for CSET 4998
(Honors Thesis). Students may enroll in CSET 4998 for one or
two semesters, for up to 3 credit hours per semester.
The final thesis must be submitted no later than two weeks
before the end of classes in the semester of graduation.
The oral defense of the thesis will take place one to two
weeks after the final thesis is submitted. The examination
committee is composed of the thesis supervisor and two
additional faculty members, at least one of whom must be a
faculty member affiliated with the CSET program. The oral
defense is public and should take approximately one hour,
including time for questions from members of the committee.
The faculty examination committee will determine by majority
vote whether the student has earned Honors and whether said
student should receive Honors or Highest Honors. Highest
Honors is reserved for students with GPAs in the CSET major
and overall above 3.50, whose theses are of near-publication
quality, and whose oral defenses are at the highest level.

vanderbilt university

Minor in Communication of Science and Technology
The minor in the Communication of Science and Technology
consists of seven courses, totaling a minimum of 21 credit
hours, distributed as follows:
1) Written and Oral Communications courses (3 courses):
a. CSET 2100 or CSET 3890. If neither course is offered
for two consecutive years, minors may, with approval of the
program director, substitute a course from category “1c.”
b. One advanced public-speaking course: CMST 2110 or
2120
c. One advanced (2000-level or higher) “W” course as
defined in the rules for the CSET major
2) Natural Science and Engineering courses (4 courses):
a. One course bridging science, engineering, or medicine
and health with non-science content and issues, including public policy courses and environmental courses (selected from
list of courses for majors)
b. Three courses (minimum 3 credit hours per course) from
engineering and/or the natural sciences, at least two of which
must be 2000-level or higher Natural Science courses (as defined
for the major). The other course may be a 2000-level or higher
Natural Science course or a course taken at any level from the
School of Engineering. Students may count 9 credit hours of
Natural Science and/or Engineering courses toward this part
of 21-credit-hour requirement, even if they choose to take three
4-credit-hour courses. Students may count the 1-credit-hour
courses ES 1401, 1402, and 1403 as equivalent to a single 3-credithour course if they earn credit for all three courses.
Course descriptions begin on page 159.

Communication Studies
CHAIR Claire Sisco King
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Paul H. Stob
PROFESSOR EMERITUS Kassian A. Kovalcheck
PROFESSORS Bonnie J. Dow, John M. Sloop
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Vanessa B. Beasley, Jeffrey A. Bennett,
Claire Sisco King, Paul H. Stob, Isaac West
SENIOR LECTURERS Neil Butt (Director of Debate), John P. Koch
(Associate Director of Debate), M. L. Sandoz (Director of Forensics),
Courtney C. Travers, Dustin A. Wood
LECTURER John P. Koch (Assistant Director of Debate)

The Department of Communication Studies offers a major
and a minor that include courses in the following areas:
historical and theoretical foundations of communication study,
argumentation and oral advocacy, the historical and critical
study of public discourse and deliberation, and the analysis of
mass media and culture.
The Vanderbilt University Varsity Debate Team competes at
national and regional levels. A full program of intercollegiate
debate is available for students who choose to participate in
forensics.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

College of Arts and Science / Earth and Environmental Sciences

Program of Concentration in Communication Studies
Communication studies explores purposive human communication. The Department of Communication Studies is
particularly devoted to an understanding of public discourse in
the broadest sense, with an emphasis on the role of persuasion
in civil society. To that end the subjects of study range from
political discourse to commercial advertisement, from the
history of rhetoric to the impact of mass media, from criticism
of American public oratory to issues of freedom of speech. The
department offers courses involving practice, criticism, and
theoretical analysis. Education in these areas has traditionally
produced citizen advocates who enter public life in business,
law, journalism, and communication.
A major in communication studies requires 30 credit hours
of course work. The requirements and options for the major
are as follows:
1. Two courses (6 credit hours) in Foundations: 1002 and 1500.
2. One course (3 credit hours) in Argumentation and Advocacy: 2100, 2110, 2120.
3. Three courses (9 credit hours) in Public Discourse and
Deliberation: 3000, 3001, 3002, 3110, 3120, 3140, 3600, 3700;
one of which must be 3000, 3001, or 3002.
4. Three courses (9 credit hours) in Culture, Theory, and
Critique: 2800, 2950, 3100, 3620, 3620W, 3710, 3720, 3740.
5. One elective course (3 credit hours), selected from the
courses listed in requirements 2 through 4, which has not
been counted toward those requirements.
1111, 3840, 3850, 3890, 4960, and 4961 may be counted
toward the major in the category corresponding to the topic of
the course, with the permission of the director of undergraduate studies.

Minor in Communication Studies
A minor in communication studies requires completion of 18
credit hours from the following requirements and options:
1. Two courses (6 credit hours) in Foundations: 1002 and 1500.
2. One course (3 credit hours) in Argumentation and Advocacy: 2100, 2110, 2120.
3. Three courses (9 credit hours) from requirements 3 and 4 in
the major; one of which must be 3000, 3001, or 3002.
1111, 3840, 3850, 3890, 4960, and 4961 may not be counted
toward the minor.
Course descriptions begin on page 159.

91

Earth and Environmental
Sciences
CHAIR Steven L. Goodbred
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Lily L. Claiborne
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Guilherme Gualda
PROFESSORS EMERITI Leonard P. Alberstadt, Molly Fritz Miller,
Arthur L. Reesman, William G. Siesser, Richard G. Stearns
PROFESSORS John C. Ayers, Ralf Bennartz, James H. Clarke, David J.
Furbish, Steven L. Goodbred, George M. Hornberger, Calvin F. Miller
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Jonathan M. Gilligan, Guilherme Gualda
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Simon A. F. Darroch, Larisa R. G. DeSantis,
Maria Luisa Jorge, Neil P. Kelley, Jessica L. Oster
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Neil P. Kelley, Garrett W. Tate,
Christopher P. Vanags
SENIOR LECTURERS Lily L. Claiborne, Daniel J. Morgan

THE Earth and environmental sciences are aimed at understanding Earth’s governing processes—how they operate and
interact—as well as interpreting Earth’s dynamic history—its age
and origin as recorded in rocks and the landscape—and finally,
at understanding how geological processes affect modern environmental and ecological systems, including humans. Among
the natural sciences, ours is the quintessential interdisciplinary
science, providing vital perspective on how Earth’s physical and
geochemical template simultaneously sustains and threatens life,
and influences human interactions with Earth.
The Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences
(EES) offers an undergraduate major leading to the B.A.
degree. Students majoring in EES take a core set of lab science
courses with field components, then propose a course plan that
creates an area of concentration in solid Earth, Earth surface,
or environmental science while maintaining breadth across
the discipline. The comparatively small size of the faculty and
student body allows many opportunities for faculty-student
interaction. Students use the major as preparation for graduate study, for careers in environmental science, geology, and
natural resource and energy exploration, and for related fields
such as land use planning, teaching, conservation, business,
law, or engineering.
Research programs in the department, which in many cases
involve students, employ field, analytical, and experimental
methods. A wide variety of Earth processes are investigated,
ranging from the migration of fluids and generation of magmas in the Earth’s crust, to the movement of mass and energy
across land, ocean, and atmosphere, to the evolution of life
and ecosystems, to the impacts of humans on the environment.
Study areas, in addition to Tennessee, include the southwestern United States, the Pacific northwest, the southern Appalachians, Florida, Antarctica, South Asia, Brazil, Peru, Namibia,
the Bahamas, Australia, and New Zealand.
For students with primary interests in environmental issues,
there are three options. A student may major in EES with
an environmental focus or may construct an individualized
interdisciplinary major outside of the department. Alternatively,
a student may major in another conventional discipline and augment that with an Earth and environmental sciences minor.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

A&S

92

vanderbilt university

Program of Concentration in Earth and Environmental
Sciences

Chemistry (1601/1601L and 1602/1602L)

The EES major is designed to provide a solid grounding in the
Earth and environmental sciences while allowing flexibility
in the particular focus. The major is organized into five parts,
beginning with one of two introductory courses that serve as
entry points. The second part involves three core courses with
labs that provide all majors with a common background. At least
one core course must be completed before students may enroll
in the more advanced focus courses of part three. Also, prior
to taking any focus courses, students must submit a one-page
course plan for parts three and four that explains their choice of
advanced courses based on expressed goals and interests. The
course plan should be designed in consultation with a faculty
adviser and must be approved by the director of undergraduate
studies. In most cases, students will also declare the major at this
time. The third part of the major defines a focus in the general
areas of solid Earth, Earth surface, or environmental science. A
brief description of each focus and a list of most relevant courses
are given below. The fourth part follows the focus and allows
three qualified electives to pursue depth in the focus or broaden
to include another area of concentration. The fifth component
of the major is a 1 credit hour seminar that serves as a capstone
for senior students. In addition to the major, qualified students
may elect to participate in the Honors Program designed for
highly motivated students who want to pursue research as
undergraduates. Opportunities for research may be available to
other students outside of the Honors Program.
At least 37 credit hours toward the major are required as
follows:

Calculus (Math 1200/1201, 1300/1301, or higher)

1. Introductory Course (3+1 credit hours each):
1510/1510L or 1030/1030L

4

2. Core Courses with Lab (3 or 4 credit hours each):
2510, 2550, and 2580 (2550 was formerly 3250)

11

Note: Math 1100, 1201, or 1301 are prerequisite or
corequisite for 2550 and 2580. Math 1100 provides
the basic calculus skills required for the EES major
but does not qualify students for any more advanced
math courses at Vanderbilt. Math 1301 is recommended
for students interested in taking additional math courses
or calculus-based physics that may be suggested by some
graduate programs.
3. Focus Courses with Lab (4 credit hours each):
Three of the following per the approved course plan:
3220, 3260, 3280, 3310, 3330, or 3340
12
4. Three electives, at least two at 4000 level (3 or 4 credit
hours each):
An additional 3000-level course, or 4420, 4550,
4600, 4650, 4680, 4750, 4760, 4820, 4830, or 4891 9–10
Note: Does not include Directed and Independent
Studies: 3841, 3842, 3851, or 3852
5. Senior Seminar:
4961
		Total hours:

1
37–38

Additional supporting science and math courses are highly
recommended for the major. Courses in chemistry, physics,
math and possibly biological sciences are recommended and
may be required for admittance into graduate school or for
employment. Recommended selections include:

Physics (1601/1601L and 1602/1602L)
Biological Sciences (1100/1100L, 1103, 1510/1510L, 1511/1511L,
2218, 2219, or 2238/2238L)

Options for Area of Focus
In-depth Earth and Environmental Sciences courses can be
chosen to define a focus area within EES. Students should
consult with their major adviser about choosing a focus area
and associated course options. Students may also formulate an
individualized focus area that may incorporate components
of several areas to maintain breadth. All parts of the Earth are
interconnected, and students are encouraged to maintain some
breadth in their plan to create a comprehensive understanding
of the cycling of energy and materials through Earth’s spheres.
Further descriptions of these focus options and recommended
courses can be found in the EES major handbook on the EES
department homepage.
Solid Earth Focus

This focus area most closely reflects a traditional geology
degree, focusing on the processes and history of the Earth as
recorded in its rocks, how those rocks are formed and how
they change with changing conditions. Focus and elective
courses appropriate for Solid Earth include: 3260, 3340, 3330,
3220, 4420, 4550, 4600, 4830.
Earth Surface Focus

This focus area considers interactions between Earth’s land
surface, oceans, and atmosphere, for example governing how
rivers, mountains, coasts, or the climate operate and evolve
with time. Earth surface systems also define the planet’s critical
zone that supports life and its ecosystems. Focus and elective
courses appropriate for Earth Surface include: 3330, 3220, 3280,
4420, 4600, 4550, 4650, 4680.
Environmental Focus

This focus considers aspects of the hydrosphere, biosphere,
atmosphere, and coupled human-environment systems, both
present and past. Life on Earth impacts and is impacted by
Earth’s environments and is therefore central to this focus.
Focus and elective courses most appropriate for Environmental
include: 3220, 3280, 3310, 4650, 4680, 4820, 489, 4750, 4760.

Honors in Earth and Environmental Sciences
The EES Honors Program provides research experience and
mentoring in preparation for a career or graduate studies in
Earth and environmental sciences. Interested students should
apply to the undergraduate adviser for entry into the Honors
Program fall semester, junior year. A grade point average of 3.3
or higher both cumulatively and in courses that count toward
the EES major is required for admission to the Honors Program.
Working closely with a faculty adviser, students in the
Honors Program complete a research project of interest to
both the student and faculty member during the senior year.
In order to graduate with honors in EES, a student must: (1)
maintain a 3.3 grade point average both in the EES major and

College of Arts and Science / Economics

cumulatively; (2) complete the required courses for the EES
major; (3) complete Senior Honors Seminar (4996, 4997) and
Senior Honors Research (4998, 4999); (4) satisfactorily present
the results of his/her research in written form as a senior thesis
to two members of the faculty and orally to students and faculty
of the department.

Minor in Earth and Environmental Sciences
The minor in EES provides students with a broad background
in Earth processes, systems, and history, and an introduction
to environmental issues. This background is highly relevant to
many different fields of endeavor. The minor does not, however,
fully prepare students for graduate studies or employment as
Earth scientists. Students should consult with the director of
undergraduate studies about how the minor in EES fits with
their career or graduate school interests.
The minor consists of at least five courses (at least 17 credit
hours; EES 1510/1510L and 1030/1030L each count as one course).
Although EES 1510 (with 1510L) and 1030 (with 1030L) are highly
recommended, students are encouraged to choose courses based
on their interests and career plans and to discuss course selection with the director of undergraduate studies. No more than
two 1000-level courses count toward the minor. Two courses
with labs are required; one must be numbered above 2000. No
credit toward the minor is given for EES 3841–3842 or 3851–3852.

Licensure for Teaching
EES majors may choose a second major in science education
which includes teaching licensure, a prudent choice if interested in teaching. Peabody offers a fifth-year master’s program
for science majors interested in teaching. Upon graduating
with a B.A. in EES, EES majors in the fifth-year program
would spend the next summer and academic year earning their
M.Ed. and teaching licensure.
Students seeking teacher certification in science disciplines at the secondary level should refer to the chapter on
Certification for Teaching in the Peabody College section of
the Undergraduate Catalog. Please contact Professor Heather
Johnson, coordinator of science secondary education, at
heather.j.johnson@vanderbilt.edu for more information.
Course descriptions begin on page 160.

Economics
CHAIR Peter L. Rousseau
VICE CHAIR Joel Rodrigue
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Rupinder Saggi
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Mattias Polborn
PROFESSORS EMERITI Jeremy Atack, William W. Damon, T. Aldrich
Finegan, C. Elton Hinshaw, Cliff J. Huang, Andrea Maneschi, Clifford
S. Russell, John J. Siegfried, George H. Sweeney, Anthony M. Tang,
Fred M. Westfield
PROFESSORS Kathryn H. Anderson, Eric W. Bond, Christopher (Kitt)
Carpenter, William J. Collins, John Conley, Mario Crucini, Andrew
F. Daughety, Robert A. Driskill, Benjamin Eden, Kevin X. D. Huang,
Gregory Huffman, Atsushi Inoue, Tong Li, Mattias Polborn, Jennifer F.
Reinganum, Peter L. Rousseau, Kamal Saggi, W. Kip Viscusi, John A.
Weymark, Myrna Wooders
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Malcolm Getz, Andrea Moro, Yuya Sasaki

93
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Andrew Dustan, Andrew Goodman-Bacon,
Federico H. Gutierrez, Eun Jeong Heo, Gregory Leo, Michelle Marcus,
Alejandro Molnar, Hyunseung Oh, Joel Rodrigue, Pedro Sant’Anna,
Diana N. Weymark, Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins, Ariell Zimran
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURERS Stephen G. Buckles, Rupinder Saggi,
John Vrooman
SENIOR LECTURERS Ana Regina Andrade, Kent, Dolezal, Hojjatallah
Ghandi, Heather Luea, Christina H. Rennhoff, Zaruhi Sahakyan,
Stephanie So

THE Department of Economics offers an undergraduate major
and minor in economics. Qualified economics majors may also
elect to take graduate courses or participate in honors work.
The department participates with the Department of History
in a concentration in economics and history. Other economicsrelated minors are discussed under Managerial Studies.
Economics 1010 and 1020 are prerequisites to all courses
numbered above 2000, except Economics 2220 which only
requires Economics 1010.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Economics
The requirements for the major include completion of at least
33 credit hours in economics courses, including 1010, 1020,
1500 or 1510 (or Math 2820L with Math 2810 or Math 2820),
3010, 3020. Students who complete Economics 3050 with Math
2820L and Math 2810 or Math 2820 as a prerequisite need not
take Economics 1500 or 1510. At least 9 credit hours must be
in courses numbered 3050 or above. Financial Economics
(FNEC) courses do not count toward the economics major.
Economics 1111 may be counted as an elective. No more than
3 credit hours of independent study may be included in the
minimum 33 credit hours required for the major.

Mathematics Prerequisite
Two semesters of calculus are strongly recommended for
majors and minors in the department. Calculus is a prerequisite for Economics 1500, 1510, 3010, and 3020, courses that
are required in the economics major and minor. At least one
semester of calculus is required for all our programs.

Minor in Economics
The minor in economics requires 21 credit hours, including
1010, 1020, 1500 or 1510 (or Math 2820L with Math 2810 or
Math 2820), 3010, and 9 credit hours of electives. Students who
complete Economics 3050 with Math 2820L and Math 2810
or Math 2820 as a prerequisite need not take Economics 1500
or 1510. At least one elective must be numbered 3050 or above.
One semester of calculus is prerequisite to 1500, 1510, and 3010.
Financial Economics (FNEC) courses do not count toward the
economics major.

Honors Program
An honors program is available in economics. This program
is designed for highly motivated students interested in doing
independent research. Students who meet the College of Arts
and Science’s requirements for honors candidacy as set forth
elsewhere in this catalog should consult the director of undergraduate studies no later than the fall term of their junior year.

A&S

94

Honors candidates must take two semesters of calculus and 36
credit hours of work in economics, including all 15 credit hours
of courses required for the Economics major. The following
Honors Core requirements must be met in order for Honors in
Economics to be awarded: (1) Economics 3050, Introduction
to Econometrics (3 credit hours); (2) Economics 3698, Junior
Honors Research (1 credit hour); (3) Economics 3851–3852,
Senior Thesis (6 credit hours), culminating in a written thesis;
(4) Economics 4981–4982, Honors Seminar (2 credit hours); (5)
9 credit hours of electives including 3 credit hours in an Economics course above 3050. Honors candidates are required to
write a senior thesis and to defend it in an oral examination. On
satisfactory completion of this program, a student will graduate
with honors or with highest honors in economics.

Program of Concentration in Economics and History
This is an interdisciplinary program split between Economics
and History that provides a more focused program of study
while requiring fewer credit hours than a double major in the
two fields. The program consists of 45 credit hours of course
work of which 9 credit hours are from a common economic history core and the remaining 36 credit hours are evenly divided
between Economics and History. Students are expected to
observe course-specific requirements in each department. The
details are spelled out below under Economics and History.

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in economics at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.
The description of the Concentration in Economics below will
apply to students who matriculate at Vanderbilt in August 2018
and thereafter.

Program of Concentration in Economics
The requirements for the major include completion of at least
33 credit hours in economics courses, including 1010, 1020,
1500 or 1510 (or Math 2820L with Math 2810 or Math 2820),
3012, 3022, and 3032 or 3035. Students who complete Economics 3032 or 3035 and Math 2820L with Math 2810 or Math 2820
as a prerequisite need not take Economics 1500 or 1510. At least
9 credit hours must be in courses numbered above 3035. At
least 15 credit hours that count toward the economics major
must be taken at Vanderbilt. Financial Economics (FNEC)
courses do not count toward the economics major. Economics
1111 may be counted as an elective. No more than 3 credit hours
of independent study may be included in the minimum 33
credit hours required for the major.

Mathematics Prerequisite
Students who matriculate at Vanderbilt in the fall 2018 and
thereafter are required to complete two semesters of calculus
before enrolling in Economics courses numbered above 3000.

Minor in Economics
The minor in economics requires 21 credit hours, including
1010, 1020, 1500 or 1510 (or Math 2820L with Math 2810 or
Math 2820), 3012, and 9 credit hours of electives. At least one
elective must be numbered above 3015. Students who complete

vanderbilt university

Economics 3050 with Math 2820L and Math 2810 or Math
2820 as a prerequisite need not take Economics 1500 or 1510.
Financial Economics (FNEC) courses do not count toward the
economics major.

Honors Program
An honors program is available in economics. This program
is designed for highly motivated students interested in doing
independent research. Students who meet the College of Arts
and Science’s requirements for honors candidacy as set forth
elsewhere in this catalog should consult the director of undergraduate studies no later than the fall term of their junior year.
Honors candidates who matriculate in fall 2018 and thereafter
must complete 36 credit hours in economics, including the
18 credit hours of courses required of all economics majors.
Honors candidates should complete 3032 or 3035 before senior
year. In addition, the Honors Program requires completion of
(1) Economics 3698 Junior Honors Research (1 credit hour), (2)
Economics 3851–3852 Senior Thesis (6 credit hours), culminating in a written thesis, (3) Economics 4981–4982 Honors Seminar (2 credit hours), (4) 9 credit hours of electives including at
least 6 credit hours in Economics courses above 3035. Honors
candidates are required to write a senior thesis and to defend
it in an oral examination. On satisfactory completion of this
program, a student will graduate with honors or with highest
honors in economics.

Program of Concentration in Economics and History
This is an interdisciplinary program split between Economics and History that provides a more focused program of
study while requiring fewer credit hours than a double major
in the two fields. The program consists of 45 credit hours
of course work of which 9 credit hours are from a common
economic history core and the remaining 36 credit hours are
evenly divided between Economics and History. Students
are expected to observe course-specific requirements in each
department. The details are spelled out below under Economics and History.

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in economics at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.
Course descriptions begin on page 162.

Economics and History
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The joint major in economics and history makes an important
contribution to liberal education at Vanderbilt by helping
students understand the origins and organization of modern
society. It also provides a unique preparation for careers in
business, the professions, and other fields by combining all the
analytical tools of the regular economics major with history’s
emphasis on clear and effective writing and on developing

College of Arts and Science / English

skills in gathering, assessing, and synthesizing information.
The program consists of 45 credit hours of course work: 9
credit hours in an economic history core, and an additional 18
credit hours in economics and 18 in history. Students declare
their major through the Department of History office.
Note: All students must have at least one semester of calculus; two are strongly recommended for the economics component. Calculus is a prerequisite for ECON 1500, 1510, 3010, and
3020, which are required for the major. It is also a prerequisite
for all economics courses numbered above 3000.
Course work for the major is distributed as follows:

Economic History Core (9 credit hours)
Three of the following courses, one of which must be an
economics course above 3000:

HIST 1600, 1640, 1660, 1665, 2138, 2660, 3190, 3200, ECON 2150,
3150, 3160. Note: ECON 3010 is a prerequisite for ECON 3150, and 3160.

Economics (18 credit hours)
ECON 1010, 1020, 1500 or 1510, 3010, 3020; one ECON course above
3000 not included in the economic history core.
Note: The following course sequences may be substituted for ECON 1500
or 1510:
(1) MATH 2820, 2820L, and 2821 or
(2) MATH 2820, 2820L, and ECON 3050. ECON 3050 will also count as
an elective.

History (18 credit hours)
No more than 3 credit hours of AP or IB credit in history courses may
count toward this total.
(1) History 3000W or 3980; must be taken by the end of the junior year.
3980 is limited to second-semester juniors who have been admitted to the
Honors Program. Students entering the Honors Program who have already
earned credit for 3000W will receive elective credit for that course.
(2) History 4960 (prerequisite: History 3000W), or History 4980–4981 (available only to students in the honors program). Note: At the discretion of the
director of honors and the director of undergraduate studies in history, a
student who has earned credit for 4980 but does not take 4981 may be
considered to have fulfilled the capstone requirement for the major.
(3) Four other history courses not included in the economic history core.
These electives may also include any of the following: AADS 2106, 2214,
2654, 4256; ASIA 2511, 2630; CLAS 2100, 2110, 2120, 2150, 2160, 2180,
3010; EUS 2201, 2208, 2220; DIV 6730, 6740; GER 2442; HOD 1115; JS
1111.09, 1200, 1220, 1240, 2450, 2540, 2560, 2600, 2620, 3000, 3100,
3210, 3892; MHS 2110; PHIL 2100; RLST 3306, 3316.

Honors Program (9 more credit hours)
Students apply to the Honors Program in History in the
first semester of the junior year.

54 credit hours: students will take the four-course honors sequence, HIST
3980, 4980–4981, 4999. Because HIST 4980–4981satisfies the capstone
requirement, honors students will not be required to take HIST 4960,
though they may enroll for 4960 as an elective. Students will write an interdisciplinary thesis under the direction of an adviser from each department.

95

English
CHAIR Dana D. Nelson
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Julia Fesmire
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Vera Kutzinski
DIRECTOR OF CREATIVE WRITING PROGRAM Kate Daniels
PROFESSORS EMERITI Vereen M. Bell, Paul Elledge, John Halperin,
R. Chris Hassel Jr., Michael Kreyling, John F. Plummer III, Harold
Lerow Weatherby Jr.
PROFESSORS Houston Baker, Robert Barsky, Jay Clayton, Kate Daniels,
Colin (Joan) Dayan, Tony Earley, Lynn E. Enterline, Sam B. Girgus,
Roy K. Gottfried, Mark Jarman, Vera Kutzinski, Jonathan Lamb,
Lorraine Lopez, Leah S. Marcus, Lorrie Moore, Dana D. Nelson,
Mark Schoenfield, Kathryn Schwarz, Hortense Spillers, Cecelia Tichi,
Mark A. Wollaeger
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Jennifer Fay, Teresa A. Goddu, Rick Hilles,
Ifeoma Nwankwo, Bridget Orr, Nancy Reisman, Allison Schachter,
Rachel Teukolsky
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Candice Amich, Christin Essin, Jessie Hock,
Marzia Milazzo, Akshya Saxena, Haerin Shin, Ben Tran
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURERS Julia Fesmire, Roger Moore
SENIOR LECTURERS John Bradley, Gabriel Briggs, Elizabeth Covington,
Rory Dicker, Alex Dubilet, Andrea Hearn, Scott Juengel, Elizabeth
Meadows, Justin Quarry
WRITERS IN RESIDENCE Beth Bachmann, Piyali Battacharya, Amanda
Little, Sandy Solomon

THE Department of English offers three distinct programs that
allow students to individualize their studies while acquiring the
breadth of knowledge and skills of the traditional English major.
The curriculum provides courses in the history of British and
American literature, in Anglophone literatures of other countries,
in literary theory, and in expository as well as creative writing.
These diverse courses reflect the interests of students and faculty
and the expanding area of English literary study. Students use
the concentration in English as a foundation for a variety of
careers where the analytic, reading, and writing skills gained
are especially valued, and as preparation for postgraduate work
in literature. The department also regards its goals as helping
students become readers of literature and culture throughout
their lives.
Programs in England, Scotland, Australia, and around the
world offer opportunities for study and travel that enrich a
student’s education. The Gertrude Vanderbilt and Harold S.
Vanderbilt Visiting Writers series annually sponsors public lectures, readings, and other occasions where English majors hear
and meet celebrated poets, novelists, and critics. Many majors
write for and serve on the editorial boards of various campus
publications including the Hustler paper and the Vanderbilt
Review, a distinguished collection of creative writing. An
English majors listserv alerts students to employment opportunities, internships, and study abroad programs in addition to
those offered through Vanderbilt University.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

A&S

96

Program of Concentration in English and American
Literature
Program I: Literary Studies (30 credit hours)

Students pursue a broad range of interests through a flexible approach to the study of literature. 30 total credit hours
including:
1. English 2200, Foundations of Literary Studies (3 credit
hours)
2. 6 credit hours in History (literature before 1800)
3. 6 credit hours of Diverse Perspectives (ethnic American or
Anglophone literature)
4. 3 credit hours in Approach
5. 9 additional credit hours of electives in English, chosen from
the courses that count toward the major
6. English 4960, Senior Capstone Seminar (3 credit hours)
A course cannot be used to satisfy more than one requirement in the major.
Courses that fulfill the requirement in numbers 2, 3, 4, and
5 above are described below under General Requirements and
Advice for Majors and Minors in All Programs.
Program II: Creative Writing (30 credit hours)

Students develop their creative writing while acquiring an
overview of English literature. 30 total credit hours including:
1. English 2200, Foundations of Literary Studies (3 credit
hours)
2. 12 credit hours of 3000-level creative writing workshops in
at least two different genres (from among: Nonfiction 3210,
3220; Fiction 3230, 3240; Poetry 3250, 3260). Admission to
these courses is by consent of instructor.
3. 3 credit hours in History (literature before 1800)
4. 3 credit hours in Diverse Perspectives (ethnic American or
Anglophone literature)
5. 9 credit hours from courses above 2000-level (except 2200)
courses that count toward the English major, which may
include one additional creative writing workshop (beyond
the four required in number 2, above) or one course in
another discipline (with approval of the director of undergraduate studies)
A course cannot be used to satisfy more than one requirement in the major.
Courses that fulfill the requirement in numbers 2, 3, 4, and
5 above are described below under General Requirements and
Advice for Majors and Minors in All Programs.
Program III: Specialized Critical Studies (36 credit hours)

Students design their own specialized course of study with a
descriptive name and develop a contract of courses for it.
36 total credit hours including:
1. English 2200, Foundations of Literary Studies (3 credit
hours)
2. 12 credit hours of course work concentrated in a particular
period (e.g., nineteenth-century American), genre, or
movement (e.g., the novel), an aspect of intellectual history

vanderbilt university

(e.g., law and literature, literary theory), or other area
of special interest. Up to 9 credit hours may be taken in
courses from other departments relevant to the concentration. In consultation with a major adviser, each student
selects specific courses, which are listed in a contract that is
filed after the student has formally declared the major.
3. 6 credit hours in History (literature before 1800)
4. 6 credit hours in Diverse Perspectives (ethnic American or
Anglophone literature)
5. 3 credit hours in Approach
6. English 4960, Senior Capstone Seminar, or 4998, Honors
Colloquium (3 credit hours)
7. 3 credit hours of any English course above 2000, except
2200
A course cannot be used to satisfy more than one requirement in the major.
Courses that fulfill the requirement in numbers 3, 4, and 5
above are described below under General Requirements and
Advice for Majors and Minors in All Programs.

Minor in English
At least 18 credit hours of course work in English are required.
These courses must include English 2200, 3 credit hours from
History (literature before 1800), and 3 credit hours of Diverse
Perspectives (ethnic American or Anglophone literature).
A course cannot be used to satisfy more than one requirement in the minor.
General Requirements and Advice for Majors and Minors in All
Programs

Students must take English 2200 for the major, ideally during
the freshman or sophomore year, or as soon as possible after
declaring the major. All courses numbered 2050 and above
(except 4999) count toward the major. English 3890, 3890W,
3892, 3892W, 3894, 3894W, and 3898 may be repeated for credit
when the topics are different. The survey courses, 2310, 2311,
2316, 2316W, 2318, 2318W, 2319, and 2319W are recommended
for sophomores to provide a background for advanced courses.
Students considering Program II (Creative Writing) may wish
to take 1280 or 1290 as preparation during their freshman or
sophomore year, although those courses will not count toward
the major.
Note: A course cannot be used to satisfy more than one
requirement in the major.
Courses that fulfill the History requirement (literature
before 1800) include 2310, 2318, 2318W, 3310, 3314, 3316, 3318,
3330, 3332, 3335, 3335W, 3336, 3337, 3340, 3340W, 3346, 3348,
3360, 3361, 3364, 3370.
Courses that fulfill the Diverse Perspectives requirement
(ethnic American or Anglophone literature) include 3650,
3650W, 3654, 3654W, 3658, 3662, 3662W, 3664, 3670, 3670W,
3674, 3678, and appropriate courses from other departments as
approved by the director of undergraduate studies.
Courses that fulfill the Approach requirement include 3710,
3711, 3720, 3720W, 3726, 3728, 3730, 3734, 3734W, 3740, 3742,
3744, 3746, 3748.
Courses that fulfill the Program II creative writing workshop requirement include 3210, 3220, 3230, 3240, 3250, 3260.
In addition, suitable sections of 3890, 3890W, 3892, 3892W,
3894, 3894W, 3746, 3898, 3898W, 4998, 4999, (as appropriate)

College of Arts and Science / Environmental and Sustainability Studies

and other courses may fulfill the categories listed. Detailed
course descriptions appear on the Department of English
website for the upcoming semester and are available in the
department. Majors are required to consult with their advisers
during registration to identify what specific requirements the
courses offered in that semester might fulfill.
One course from another department, appropriate to the student’s course of study, may be counted toward the requirements
of any program with permission of the director of undergraduate studies; for Program III, this course may be in addition to the
9 credit hours already allowed from other departments.

Honors Program
To graduate with honors in English, students must (a) complete
all the requirements of the English major, with at least 6 credit
hours in honors sections (an appropriate graduate seminar or
seminar in a study abroad program may be substituted for one
honors seminar); (b) 3 credit hours of 4998; (c) maintain at least
a 3.4 grade point average overall and 3.6 in the major; (d) be
admitted to the Honors Program in the spring of the junior year;
(e) write a thesis (4999) and pass an oral examination about its
subject in the spring of the senior year. For secondary education
double-majors, EDUC 9700 can be substituted for 4999 with the
consent of the director of undergraduate studies.
To comply with all requirements, every honors student will
complete 33 credit hours. Exceptional achievement on the thesis
will earn highest honors. Majors who wish to apply to the Honors
Program must be within 6 credit hours of completing all AXLE
requirements, must have made reasonable progress toward the
major, and must have at least a 3.4 grade point average overall
and 3.6 in the major. Applications are accepted in April of the
junior year. Additional information is available from the director
of undergraduate studies. Students need not be enrolled in the
Honors Program to take honors sections. Honors sections are
seminars open to any student beyond the freshman year who has
completed the sophomore writing requirement of AXLE and has
earned at least a 3.4 grade point average. Students are encouraged
to enroll in honors sections prior to applying to the program.

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in English at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.
Course descriptions begin on page 164.

97

Environmental and
Sustainability Studies
Director David Hess

HUMAN beings and their societies necessarily interact with
and alter the Earth’s natural environment. The environmental
and sustainability studies minor allows the student to examine
human interaction with the environment from the perspectives
of the humanities and social sciences with some exposure to the
environmental sciences and/or environmental engineering.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Minor in Environmental and Sustainability Studies
Students who want to minor in environmental and sustainability studies must take a minimum of six courses (18 credit
hours total) chosen from the courses listed below; additional
relevant courses may be counted with approval of the director
of the program. Courses must be distributed as follows: (A) one
Natural Science- and Technology-Intensive course; (B) one
Humanities course; (C) one Social-Behavioral Sciences and
Policy-Intensive course; (D) two additional courses from B and/
or C; and (E) a capstone course. No more than two courses may
be at the 1000 level. In addition, no more than 3 credit hours
may be counted simultaneously toward both the environmental
and sustainability studies minor and any other major or minor.
Topics courses may count toward the minor with approval of
the director.
A) Natural Science- and Technology-Intensive Courses: BSCI
1103, BSCI 2238, BSCI 2238L, BSCI 3233, EES 1030, EES 1070,
EES 1080, EES 1111*, EES 1510, EES 1510L, EES 2110, EES 2150,
EES 3220, EES 3220W, EES 4650, EES 4680, EES 4750, EES
4760, EES 4820, ENVE 3610, ENVE 3611, ENVE 3612, ENVE
4615, ENVE 4700, ES 1115*
B) Humanities Courses: AMER 1111*, AMER 4000*, AMER
4100*, ENGL 2316/2316W*, ENGL 3720/3720W*, ENGL 3730,
ENGL 3898/3898W*, HART 2150, HART 3240W, HART 2782,
HART 3790, HIST 1470, HIST 1480, HIST 1520, PHIL 1111*,
PHIL 3611, PHIL 3612, RLST 2472, RLST 3921, WGS 2268,
WGS 2270
C) Social-Behavioral Sciences and Policy Intensive Courses:
ANTH 1111*, ANTH 2109, ANTH 2113W, ANTH 2220,
ANTH 2220W, ANTH 2227, ANTH 3138, ANTH 3261,
ANTH 3629, ANTH 4154, ECON 2170, HOD 3212, HOD
3890*, PSCI 3253*, PSY 1111*, SOC 1020/1020W*, SOC 1111*,
SOC 3311, SOC 3312, SOC 3313, SOC 3314, SOC 3315, SOC
3316, SOC 3317, SOC 3318, SOC 3321, WGS 1111*
D) Two additional courses from lists B and/or C above.
E) Capstone: ENVS 4101 for minors only
*Special topic and First-Year Writing Seminar sections require
the approval of the director of the environmental and sustainability studies minor to count in the minor.
Course descriptions begin on page 168.

A&S

98

vanderbilt university

European Studies
DIRECTOR Ari Joskowicz
PROFESSORS Michael Bess, Joy H. Calico
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Emily Greble, Alexander Joskowicz, Meike
Werner, Christoph Zeller
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Nina Warnke
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS EMERITI M. Donald Hancock (Political Science), John A.
McCarthy (German)
PROFESSORS Celia Applegate (History), David Blackbourn (History),
W. James Booth (Political Science), William Caferro (History), Katherine
B. Crawford (History), Cynthia Cyrus (Musicology), Robert Driskill
(Economics), Lynn E. Enterline (English), James A. Epstein (History),
Edward F. Fischer (Anthropology), Leonard Folgarait (History of Art),
William P. Franke (Comparative Literature and Italian), Edward H.
Friedman (Spanish), Lenn E. Goodman (Philosophy), Roy K. Gottfried
(English), Barbara Hahn (German), Joel F. Harrington (History), Mark
Jarman (English), Christopher M. S. Johns (History of Art), Lutz
Koepnick (German), John Lachs (Philosophy), Leah S. Marcus (English),
Thomas A. J. McGinn (History), Kelly Oliver (Philosophy), Lynn Ramey
(French), Philip D. Rasico (Spanish), Mark Schoenfield (English),
Thomas A. Schwartz (History), Kathryn Schwarz (English), Virginia M.
Scott (French), Holly A. Tucker (French), Mark A. Wollaeger (English),
David C. Wood (Philosophy), Andrés Zamora (Spanish)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS George Becker (Sociology), Victoria Burrus
(Spanish), Lauren Clay (History), Julia Cohen (Jewish Studies), Nathalie
Debrauwere‑Miller (French), Idit Dobbs-Weinstein (Philosophy), Jay
Geller (Divinity School), Shaul Kelner (Sociology and Jewish Studies),
Richard Lloyd (Sociology), James McFarland (German), Andrea Mirabile
(Italian), Letizia Modena (Italian), Elizabeth J. Moodey (History of Art),
Anthère Nzabatsinda (French), Michael A. Rose (Composition), Allison
Schachter (Jewish Studies), Jeffrey S. Tlumak (Philosophy), Francis W.
Wcislo (History), Julian Wuerth (Philosophy)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Jason Strudler (Russian), William F. Robinson
(History)
SENIOR LECTURERS Elena Olazagasti-Segovia (Spanish), Sheri F.
Shaneyfelt (History of Art)
LECTURER David Johnson (Russian)
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in European Studies
Designed for students who seek to broaden their awareness
of the European experience and to prepare for international
careers or advanced study, the Program in European Studies
(EUS) offers disciplinary breadth as well as expertise in a specialty of students’ choosing. Most EUS majors also participate
in one of the Vanderbilt study abroad programs in Europe and/
or reside in the International House on campus.
The interdisciplinary major consists of 42 credit hours of
course work, to be distributed among various disciplines as indicated below. Emphasis is on political, cultural, economic, and
related trends or events especially since the early modern period.
Advising is crucial to the successful completion of the major
in EUS. In consultation with an adviser in European Studies,
students choose a thematic focus and specific courses that will
fulfill the requirements for the major. This focus can consist of a
thematic or comparative topic (such as culture and society during a particular epoch), a regional or sub-regional topic (such as
European integration, the Iberian Peninsula, the Baltic region),
or the culture and society of a particular nation (such as France,

Germany, Italy, Poland, Spain). In addition to the core requirements, majors take relevant courses in history, social sciences,
and the humanities, as well as a foreign language of the student’s
choice.
The Program in European Studies sponsors special activities including a visiting lecture series, international symposia, and informal faculty-student luncheon seminars. Both
academic scholars and public figures are invited to campus to
address European and transatlantic affairs.
Required Core Courses (21 credit hours)
• EUS 2201, European Society and Culture (3 credit
hours).
• EUS 2203, The Idea of Europe (3 credit hours).
• EUS 4960, Senior Tutorial (3 credit hours).
• 6 credit hours in Political Science, PSCI 2210, West
European Politics, and PSCI 3211, The European Union,
or appropriate substitute(s) with the approval of the
EUS adviser.
• 6 credit hours in European history in the student’s
special interest area, to be selected from the list below
and in consultation with the major adviser.
Foreign Language Requirement (6 credit hours)
The foreign language requirement is to be satisfied in one of
the following ways:
• 6 credit hours of course work beyond the intermediate
level in one European language;
• course work through the intermediate level in two
European languages;
• demonstration of proficiency equivalent to either of the
preceding options; or
• participation in one of the Vanderbilt study programs
in Europe (students participating in the Vanderbilt in
England program must complete course work through
the intermediate level in one European language, or
demonstrate equivalent proficiency).
Electives (15 credit hours)
The remainder of the 42 credit hours required for the major
may be selected from the list of courses below or from among
approved courses taken abroad. Students majoring in EUS are
advised to select courses from the social sciences and humanities that complement their areas of special interest and their
thematic focus. They should be distributed as follows:
• 3 additional credit hours in history
• 3 additional credit hours from other social science fields
• 9 credit hours from the humanities
Other Issues Relating to the Major
Normally, no more than 6 credit hours of work in 1000level courses may be counted toward the major; however, students with two languages through the intermediate level may
also count toward the major the intermediate-level courses in
one of those languages.
Independent study and research courses and selected topics
courses should have topics appropriate to the student’s course of
study.
Students seeking a second major may count a maximum
of 6 credit hours of course work to meet requirements in both
majors.

Joint Major Option
The Program in European Studies collaborates with several
departments to create joint majors in French and European

College of Arts and Science / European Studies

studies, German and European studies, Italian and European
studies, Russian and European studies, Spanish and European
studies, and Spanish, Portuguese, and European studies. These
options are offered as collaborations between the Program in
European Studies and the Departments of French and Italian,
Germanic and Slavic Languages, and Spanish and Portuguese.
Please see the detailed information on the joint major options
under the departmental headings in this catalog. Students
selecting one of these options will be advised by their major
adviser in the language department as well as their adviser in
the Program in European Studies.

Honors Program
The Program in European Studies offers qualified majors the
option of completing a portion of their major requirements in
an Honors Program. Students engage in interdisciplinary reading, consultations with faculty, and research on the overarching
theme of their program of concentration. To be admitted to
the program students must have attained a minimum cumulative grade point average of 3.300 and a minimum grade point
average of 3.300 in all courses that count toward the EUS major;
identify an adviser for the thesis; submit a detailed description of
their proposed program of study for approval of the director of
EUS; complete 3 credit hours of independent research (normally
EUS 4998); complete 3 credit hours of credit in EUS 4960, Senior
Tutorial, that involves researching and writing a senior honors
thesis of approximately fifty pages and that reveals an interdisciplinary perspective; successfully defend the honors thesis before
a committee normally consisting of the adviser, the director of
EUS, and another EUS faculty member.
Information concerning the Honors Program is available from the director of EUS. College regulations governing
honors programs may be found in this catalog under Honors
Programs, Special Programs for Arts and Science.

The Minor in European Studies
The EUS minor is a logical complement to a major in anthropology, history, economics, literary studies, philosophy, and
political science. It involves 18 credit hours of course work with
concentration and distribution requirements similar to those for
the major, but on a reduced scale. A background in a modern
foreign language is highly recommended. Students choose a
thematic focus and take approved European content courses
distributed as follows:
• EUS 2201, European Society and Culture
• EUS 2203, The Idea of Europe
• 3 additional credit hours selected from EUS-labeled
courses (or approved substitute)
• a minimum of 3 credit hours of modern European history
• a minimum of 3 credit hours of relevant work in social
science
• a minimum of 3 credit hours of relevant work in
humanities
The minimum number of credit hours required for the minor
is 18.

List of Approved Courses with European Content
Because the curricular offerings are constantly changing, prospective majors and minors should consult with the director
about appropriate substitutes for courses listed below.

99

European History
EUROPEAN STUDIES: 2208, Conspiracy Theories and Rumors in European and U.S. History; 2220, Religion and Politics in Modern Europe,
1648–Present; 2240, Topics in European Studies; 2260, European Cities.
HISTORY: 1111-08, European Imperialism: Colonizer and Colonized in
the Modern World; 1350, Western Civilization to 1700; 1360, Western
Civilization since 1700; 1390, America to 1776: Discovery to Revolution;
1480, The Darwinian Revolution; 1500, History of Modern Sciences and
Society; 1510, The Scientific Revolution; 1580, Crime and Punishment in
Early Modern Europe 1400–1800 CE; 1600, European Economic History,
1000–1700; 1700, Western Military History to 1815; 1730, The U.S. and the
Cold War; 1760, History of Christian Traditions; 2130, Russia: Old Regime
to Revolution; 2135, Russia: The U.S.S.R. and Afterward; 2220, Medieval
and Renaissance Italy, 1000–1700; 2230, Medieval Europe, 1000–1350;
2250, Reformation Europe; 2260, Revolutionary Europe, 1789–1815; 2270,
Nineteenth-Century Europe; 2280, Europe, 1900–1945; 2290, Europe
since 1945; 2300, Twentieth-Century Germany; 2310, France: Renaissance
to Revolution; 2340, Modern France; 2380, Shakespeare’s Histories and
History; 2382, The Rise of the Tudors; 2383, A Monarchy Dissolved? From
Good Queen Bess to the English Civil War; 2385, The Real Tudors; 2410,
Victorian England; 2450, Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America,
1700–1820; 2595W, The English Atlantic World, 1500-1688; 2720, World
War II; 2800, Modern Medicine; 2835, Sexuality and Gender in the Western
Tradition to 1700; 2840, Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition since
1700; 3010, Pornography and Prostitution in History; 3120, Weimar Germany: Modernism and Modernity, 1918–1933; 3150, Cities of Europe and
the Middle East; 3180, Making of Modern Paris; 3230, The Art of Empire;
3260, Revolutionary England, 1603–1710; 3270, Religion and the Occult
in Early Modern Europe; 3275, Religion and Popular Culture in NineteenthCentury Europe.
JEWISH STUDIES: 1002, Introduction to Jewish Studies; 1002W, Introduction to Jewish Studies; 1200, Classical Judaism: Jews in Antiquity; 1220,
Jews in the Medieval World; 1240, Perspectives in Modern Jewish History;
2250W, Witnesses Who Were Not There: Literature of the Children of Holocaust Survivors; 3100, The Holocaust.

Social Sciences
ANTHROPOLOGY: 3371, Social and Health Consequences of Pandemics.
ECONOMICS: 3160, Economic History of Europe; 3600, International
Trade; 3610, International Finance.
EUROPEAN STUDIES: 2240, Topics in European Studies; 2800, Pursuing
Utopia: Social Justice & Romanticism in the Alps.
POLITICAL SCIENCE: 1101, Introduction to Comparative Politics; 1102,
Introduction to International Politics; 1103, Justice; 2202, Ancient Political
Thought; 2203, History of Modern Political Philosophy; 2210, West European Politics; 2220, Crisis Diplomacy; 2221, Causes of War; 2223, European
Political Economy and Economic Institutions; 2225, International Political
Economy; 2226, International Law and Organization; 2274, Nature of War;
4238, Comparative Political Parties; 3211, The European Union.
SOCIOLOGY: 3851, Independent Research and Writing (with appropriate
topic); 4961, Seminars in Selected Topics (with appropriate topic).

Humanities
CLASSICS: 3120, Humor, Ancient to Modern.
COMMUNICATION STUDIES: 3600, The Rhetorical Tradition.
ENGLISH: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (with appropriate topic); 2310,
British Writers to 1660; 2311, British Writers 1660–Present; 3310, AngloSaxon Language and Literature; 3314, Chaucer; 3316, Medieval Literature;
3330, Sixteenth Century; 3332, English Renaissance: The Drama; 3335W,
English Renaissance Poetry; 3336, Shakespeare: Comedy and Histories;
3337, Shakespeare: Tragedy and Romance; 3340, Shakespeare: Representative Selections; 3340W, Shakespeare: Representative Selections;

A&S

100
3346, Seventeenth-Century Literature; 3348, Milton; 3360, Restoration and
the Eighteenth Century Early; 3361, Restoration and Eighteenth Century
Late; 3364, The Eighteenth-Century English Novel; 3370, The Bible in Literature; 3610, The Romantic Period; 3611, The Romantic Period; 3614, The
Victorian Period; 3618, The Nineteenth-Century English Novel; 3630, The
Modern British Novel; 3634, Modern Irish Literature; 3640, Modern British
and American Poetry: Yeats to Auden; 3681, Twentieth-Century British and
World Drama; 3683, Contemporary British Literature; 3740, Critical Theory;
3890, Movements in Literature (with appropriate topic); 3890W, Movements
In Literature (with appropriate topic); 3892, Problems in Literature (with appropriate topic); 3892W, Problems in Literature (with appropriate topic);
3894, Major Figures in Literature (with appropriate topic); 3894W, Major
Figures In Literature (with appropriate topic); 3898, Special Topics in English
and American Literature (with appropriate topic); 3898W, Special Topics In
English and American Literature (with appropriate topic).
EUROPEAN STUDIES: 2240, Topics in European Studies; 2260, European
Cities; 2800, Pursuing Utopia: Social Justice & Romanticism in the Alps.
FRENCH: 2501W, French Composition and Grammar; 2614, Advanced
Conversational French; 3101, Texts and Contexts: Middle Ages to the Enlightenment; 3102, Texts and Contexts: Revolution to the Present; 3111,
French for Business; 3113, Advanced French Grammar; 3180, La Provence;
3181, Contemporary France; 3188, The Contemporary Press and Media;
3222, The Early Modern Novel; 3223, The Querelles des femmes; 3224,
Medieval French Literature; 3230, French and Francophone Cinema; 3242,
Dante and the Foundations of Modern Western Civilization; 3281, Provence
and the French Novel; 3286, Cultural Study Tour; 3620, Age of Louis XIV;
3621, Enlightenment and Revolution; 3622, From Romanticism to Symbolism; 3623, The Twentieth-Century Novel; 4025, From Carnival to the “Carnivalesque”; 4027, Emile Zola: From Naturalist Novels to Social Activism;
4029, Twentieth-Century French Literature; 4030, French and Italian Avantgarde; 4221, Literature of the Fantastic; 4232, Literature and Law; 4284,
Art and Literature of the Nineteenth Century; 4285, Art and Literature of
the Twentieth Century; 4320, French Feminist Thought: Literary and Critical;
4322, Adultery and Transgressions in Literature; 4432, French Intellectual
History.
GERMAN: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar; 1482, Borders and Crossings:
German Literature and Culture from Romanticism to the Present; 2216,
Business German; 2310W, Introduction to German Studies; 2320, Conversation and Composition: Current Events; 2321, Conversation and Composition: Contemporary Culture; 2341, German Culture and Literature; 2342,
German Culture and Literature; 2441, Great German Works in English; 2442,
War on Screen; 2443, German Cinema: Vampires, Victims, and Vamps;
2444, German Fairy Tales from Brothers Grimm to Walt Disney; 2445, Nazi
Cinema: The Manipulation of Mass Culture; 3323, From Language to Literature; 3343, The Aesthetics of Violence: Terror, Crime, and Dread in German
Literature; 3344, Women at the Margins: German-Jewish Women Writers;
3345, Love and Friendship; 3375, Art and Rebellion: Literary Experiment in
the 1960s and 1970s; 3378, Dreams in Literature; 4535, German Romanticism; 4537, Women and Modernity; 4548, German Lyric Poetry—Form and
Function; 4563, The Age of Goethe-Weimar 1775 to 1805; 4564, Pleasures
and Perils in Nineteenth-Century Theatre; 4565, Revolutionizing TwentiethCentury Theatre; 4566, Nineteenth-Century Prose; 4567, The German Novel from Kafka to Grass; 4569, Writing under Censorship; 4574, Who Am I?
German Autobiographies; 4576, Tales of Travel in Modern German Culture.
HISTORY OF ART: 1100, History of Western Art I; 1110, History of Western Art II; 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (with appropriate topic); 2220,
Greek Art and Architecture; 2270, Early Christian and Byzantine Art; 2285,
Medieval Art; 2310, Italian Art to 1500; 2320W, The Italian Renaissance
Workshop; 2325, Great Masters of the Italian Renaissance; 2330, Italian
Renaissance Art after 1500; 2360, Northern Renaissance Art; 2362, Fifteenth-Century Northern European Art; 2390, Seventeenth-Century Art;
2600, Eighteenth-Century Art; 2620, Nineteenth-Century European Art;
2622, Neoclassicism and Romanticism; 2650, Nineteenth-Century Architecture: Theory and Practice; 2652, French Art in the Age of Impressionism;
2680, British Art: Tudor to Victorian; 2708, Twentieth-Century British Art;
2710, Twentieth-Century European Art; 2720, Modern Architecture; 2722,
Modern Art and Architecture in Paris; 3224, Greek Sculpture; 3226, Greek
Vases and Society; 3228W, Gender and Sexuality in Greek Art; 3274, Art
and Empire from Constantine to Justinian; 3320, Early Renaissance Flor-

vanderbilt university
ence; 3320W, Early Renaissance Florence; 3332, Raphael and the Renaissance; 3334, Michelangelo’s Life and Works; 3334W, Michelangelo’s Life
and Works; 3364W, The Court of Burgundy; 3366, 16th-Century Northern
European Art.
ITALIAN: 1111-01, First-Year Writing Seminar: Italian History and Culture
Through Cinema; 2203, Italian Journeys; 2501W, Grammar and Composition; 2614, Conversation; 3000, Introduction to Italian Literature; 3041, Italian Civilization; 3100, Literature from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance;
3240, Dante’s Divine Comedy; 3242, Dante in Historical Context; 3340,
Famous Women by Boccaccio; 3500, Baroque, Illuminismo, and Romanticism in Italy; 3600, Twentieth-Century Literature: Beauty and Chaos; 3640,
Classic Italian Cinema; 3641, Contemporary Italian Cinema; 3701, City Fictions; 3702, Topics in Contemporary Italian Civilization; 3802, Contemporary Italian Society and Culture.
JEWISH STUDIES: 2210W, Hebrew Literature in Translation; 2250W, Witnesses Who Were Not There: Literature of the Children of Holocaust Survivors; 2270, Jewish Storytelling; 2270W, Jewish Storytelling; 2320, Freud
and Jewish Identity; 2340, Jewish Philosophy after Auschwitz; 2450, The
Jewish Diaspora; 2640, Jews and Greeks.
MUSIC LITERATURE: 1220, The Symphony; 1230, Survey of Choral Music;
2200W, Music in Western Culture; 3220, Opera in the 17th and 18th Centuries; 3221, Opera in the 19th Century; 3222, Mahler Symphonies: Songs
of Irony; 3223, Music in the Age of Beethoven and Schubert; 3224, Haydn
and Mozart; 3225, Brahms and the Anxiety of Influence; 3227, Music in the
Age of Revolution, 1789–1848; 3228, J. S. Bach: Learned Musician and Virtual Traveler; 3229, Robert Schumann and the Romantic Sensibility; 3890,
Selected Topics in Music History (with appropriate topic).
PHILOSOPHY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (with appropriate topic);
1200, The Meaning of Life; 1200W, The Meaning of Life; 2102, Medieval
Philosophy; 2103, Modern Philosophy; 2104 Nineteenth-Century Philosophy; 2109, Twentieth-Century Continental Philosophy; 2110, Contemporary
Philosophy; 2660, Philosophy of Music; 3005, Jewish Philosophy; 3007,
French Feminism; 3009, Existential Philosophy; 3010, Phenomenology;
3011, Critical Theory; 3013, History of Aesthetics; 3014, Modernistic Aesthetics; 3103, Immanuel Kant; 3104, Kierkegaard and Nietzsche; 3602, Philosophy of History; 3620, Political and Social Philosophy; 3621, Early Modern Political Philosophy; 3622, Contemporary Political Philosophy; 3623,
Modern Philosophies of Law.
PORTUGUESE: 2203, Intermediate Portuguese; 3301, Portuguese Composition and Conversation; 3892, Special Topics in Portuguese Language,
Literature, or Civilization (with appropriate topic).
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (with appropriate
topic); 1820, Religion, Sexuality, Power; 2210W, Constructions of Jewish
Identity in the Modern World; 2940, Great Books of Literature and Religion;
3229, The Holocaust: Its Meanings and Implications; 3316, Christianity in
the Reformation Era; 3940, The Nature of Evil; 3941, Religion, Science,
and Evolution; 4834, Post-Freudian Theories and Religion; 4835, Freudian
Theories and Religion.
RUSSIAN: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar; 1874, Russian Fairy Tales;
1910W, 19th Century Russian Literature; 2273, Russian Science Fiction;
2310, Survey of Russian Literature in English Translation; 2311, Survey of
Russian Literature in English Translation; 2434, The Russian Cinema; 2435,
Leo Tolstoy: Anna Karenina and Other Masterpieces; 2438, Dostoevsky’s
Major Novels: Philosophy and Aesthetics; 2537, Vladimir Nabokov; 2639,
The Story of Siberia; 2745, Art After Zero: The Russian Avant-Garde.
SPANISH: 1111-03, First-Year Writing Seminar: Travel Matters; 2990, Images of the Feminine in Spanish Cinema; 3301W, Intermediate Spanish Writing; 3302, Spanish for Oral Communication through Cultural Topics; 3325,
The Way of Saint James; 3340, Advanced Conversation; 3345, Spanish for
Business and Economics; 3355, Advanced Conversation through Cultural
Issues in Film; 3360, Spanish Civilization; 3365, Film and Recent Cultural
Trends in Spain; 4345, The Languages of Spain; 4400, The Origins of Spanish Literature; 4405, Literature of the Spanish Golden Age; 4410, Spanish
Literature from the Enlightenment to 1900; 4415, Spanish Literature from
1900 to the Present; 4440, Development of the Short Story; 4445, Development of the Novel; 4450, The Contemporary Novel; 4455, Development of

College of Arts and Science / French and Italian
Drama; 4465, Theory and Practice of Drama; 4470, Development of Lyric
Poetry; 4475, Contemporary Lyric Poetry; 4620, Love and Honor in Medieval and Golden Age Literature; 4640, Don Quixote; 4670, Spanish Realism;
4690, Alterity and Migration in Spain.
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1272, Feminism and Film.
Course descriptions begin on page 168.

French and Italian
CHAIR Laurel Schneider
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN FRENCH
Susan Kevra
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN ITALIAN
Andrea Mirabile
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Paul B. Miller
PROFESSORS EMERITI Barbara C. Bowen, Dan Church, Marc FromentMeurice, Patricia A. Ward, Ruth G. Zibart
PROFESSORS Robert Barsky, William Franke, Lynn Ramey, Virginia M.
Scott, Tracy Sharpley-Whiting, Holly A. Tucker
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Nathalie Debrauwere-Miller, Paul B. Miller,
Andrea Mirabile, Letizia Modena, Anthère Nzabatsinda
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Elsa Filosa, Raisa Rexer
SENIOR LECTURERS Nathalie Dieu-Porter, Susan Kevra
LECTURERS Rebecca Peterson, Caterina Messina

THE Department of French and Italian offers a wide range
of courses in the language, culture, and literatures of Italy,
France, and other Francophone communities. Most language,
literature, and culture courses are taught in French or Italian.
Students may use courses in both French and Italian to satisfy
some requirements of AXLE.
The Department offers a program of concentration in
French as well as two interdisciplinary programs: a concentration in French and European studies and a concentration in
Italian and European studies. Qualified French majors may
also participate in the Honors Program in French. Minors
in French and Italian are offered. On the graduate level, the
department offers a doctoral program in French.
Many students participate in the Vanderbilt in France program in Aix-en-Provence or the Italian study abroad program
in Sienna, Italy. The department offers Maymester programs
in France, Italy, and Switzerland. On-campus activities include
films, symposia, concerts, and lectures by visiting professors.
The department has chapters of national honor societies for
both French and Italian students. Students may also apply to
live on the French Hall in McTyeire International House.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in French
Students who choose to major in French are expected to achieve
advanced proficiency in oral and written French and to demonstrate a general understanding of the history of French and
Francophone literatures and cultures. No more than 6 credit
hours of AP or IB credit may count toward the 30 credit hours
required for the major (3 credit hours for 2501W and 3 credit
hours of “no equivalent” credit). All majors are strongly urged

101

to spend a semester or a year studying at Vanderbilt in France.
Majors should consult their advisers about their choice of major
courses each semester.
Course work for the major is distributed as follows:
Required courses (9 credit hours): 2501W, 3101, 3102
Two courses from Communications (6 credit hours): 2550W,
2611, 2614, 2891, 3111, 3112, 3113
Five courses from Literatures and Cultures (15 credit hours):
3180, 3181, 3188, 3222, 3223, 3224, 3230,3232, 3234, 3281, 3620,
3621, 3622, 3623, 3730, 3788, 3789, 3881,3891, 3892, 4023, 4025,
4027, 4029, 4030, 4221, 4232, 4284, 4285, 4320, 4322, 4430, 4432.

Honors Program in French
In addition to requirements set by the College of Arts and
Science, the following requirements must be met:
1. All the requirements for the 30-credit-hour major in
French.
2. One graduate-level French course during the senior year
for at least 4 credit hours; this course may substitute for one
3000- or 4000-level course required for the major.
3. A minimum of one semester of study (or the summer session) at Vanderbilt in France or at an approved substitute
program in a French-speaking country.
4. Earn a 3.5 grade point average in courses that count toward
the French major.
5. Six credit hours of thesis credit under French 4998 and 4999
(Senior Honors Thesis), culminating in a written thesis.
6. An oral examination on the thesis and its area in the last
semester of the senior year.
A three-member Honors Committee will administer the
program. Students must submit the name of the faculty adviser
and the proposed thesis topic to this committee for approval
during the second semester of the junior year. The committee
will set guidelines for the thesis topic proposal, publish deadlines each year, and administer the oral examination.

Program of Concentration in French and European Studies
Students may elect this interdisciplinary major, which requires
a minimum of 42 credit hours of course work. A semester of
study at Vanderbilt in France or at an affiliated program in Paris
is required. Course work for the joint major is distributed as
follows (all courses for the French side must be in French):
French (24 credit hours)

French Language, Literature, and Culture (9 credit hours):
2501W, 3101, 3102
Communications (6 credit hours): 2550W, 2611, 2614, 2891,
3111, 3112, or 3113
Literatures and Cultures (9 credit hours): 3180, 3181, 3188,
3222, 3223, 3224, 3230,3232, 3234, 3281, 3620, 3621, 3622, 3623,
3730, 3788, 3789, 3881,3891, 3892, 4023, 4025, 4027, 4029, 4030,
4221, 4232, 4284, 4285, 4320, 4322, 4430, 4432.
European Studies (18 credit hours)

European Studies core courses (9 credit hours): EUS 2201,
2203, 4960 (requires thesis)
Social Science (6 credit hours): PSCI 3897 when offered in
Aix, approved alternative course at IEP at Aix as approved by
the director of undergraduate studies in French (course must

A&S

102

vanderbilt university

be in French), PSCI 2210, PSCI 3211, or appropriate substitute
from any other social studies discipline with approval of the
director of European Studies
European History (3 credit hours): HIST 2230, 2250, 2260,
2270, 2280, 2290, 2310, 2340, or approved course in consultation with the director of European Studies

the community of European nations. It requires 42 credit
hours of course work; a semester of study in Italy is recommended. Prospective majors should consult with the director
of undergraduate studies in Italian and with the director of the
European Studies program. Course work for the joint major is
distributed as follows:

Minor in French

Italian (24 credit hours)

The minor in French requires 18 credit hours of 2000- or
higher-level course work, including 2501W, 3101, and 3102.
All minors are expected to consult their advisers about their
choice of courses. No course taught in English may count
toward the minor. Students are encouraged to participate in
the Vanderbilt in France program.

Minor in Italian Studies
Students who minor in Italian studies are expected to achieve
intermediate proficiency in oral and written Italian, to
demonstrate a general understanding of the history of Italian literatures and cultures, and to develop an awareness of
the ways Italian studies intersects with other disciplines. The
minor in Italian studies requires 15 credit hours of course work,
including:
Required courses (6 credit hours):
ITALIAN: 2203, Italian Journeys (prerequisite ITA 1102; ITA 1103, or equivalent); either 2501W, Grammar and Composition (prerequisite ITA 2203 or
equivalent), or 2614, Conversation (prerequisite ITA 2203 or equivalent).
ITA 1101, 1102, 1103 do not count toward the minor.

Elective courses (9 credit hours). Only 3 of these elective credit
hours may be selected from courses in subject areas other than
Italian, such as Classical Studies, History, History of Art, Music
Literature, and History:
ITALIAN: 2501W, Grammar and Composition (if not used as a required
course); 2614, Conversation (if not used as a required course); 3000, Introduction to Italian Literature; 3041, Italian Civilization; 3100, Literature from
the Middle Ages to the Renaissance; 3240, Dante’s Divine Comedy; 3340,
Famous Women by Boccaccio; 3500, Baroque, Illuminismo, and Romanticism in Italy; 3600, Twentieth-Century Literature: Beauty and Chaos; 3640,
Classic Italian Cinema; 3641, Contemporary Italian Cinema; 3701, City Fictions; 3702, Topics in Contemporary Italian Civilization; 3740, Gangsters,
Lovers, Madonnas, and Mistresses; 3802, Contemporary Italian Society
and Culture; 3890, Special Topics in Italian Literature.
CLASSICAL STUDIES: LAT 3100, Roman Comedy; LAT 3110, Catullus;
LAT 3120, Lucretius: De Rerum Natura; LAT 3130, Vergil: The Aeneid; LAT
3160, Ovid.
HISTORY: 2220, Medieval and Renaissance Italy, 1000–1700.
HISTORY OF ART: 2310, Italian Art to 1500; 2330, Italian Renaissance Art
after 1500; 3320, 3320W, Early Renaissance Florence; 3332, Raphael and
the Renaissance; 3334, 3334W, Michelangelo’s Life and Works.
MUSIC LITERATURE: 3220, Opera in the 17th and 18th Centuries; 3221,
Opera in the 19th Century.

Other Italy‐related courses not listed here—such as those in
study abroad programs—may be approved towards the minor
upon approval by the director of undergraduate studies in Italian. Students are encouraged to attend Vanderbilt in Italy.

Program of Concentration in Italian and European Studies
The joint major in Italian and European Studies acknowledges
the cultural, political, and strategic importance of Italy within

Italian language and literature — 12 credit hours from the
following courses: ITA 2203 (requires ITA 1102 or 1103), 2501W,
3000, 3100, 3240, 3340, or 3500. 2501W is prerequisite for 3000,
3100, and 3500. (Note: 1000-level Italian language courses do
not count toward the major.)
Modern cultural intersections — 12 credit hours from the
following courses, of which at least 6 credit hours must be taken
in Italian: ITA 2614, 3041, 3600, 3640, 3641, 3701, 3702, 3740, or
3802.
European Studies (18 credit hours)

European Studies core courses — 9 credit hours: EUS 2201,
2203, and 4960 (requires thesis).
Social Science — 3 credit hours from the following courses:
PSCI 2210, 3211, or appropriate substitute with the approval of
the director of the European Studies program.
History — 3 credit hours from the following courses: HIST
2260, 2270, 2280, or 2290.
Humanities — 3 credit hours from the following courses:
EUS 2240, 2260; HART 2310 or 2330.

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in French at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.

French
Students who have not studied French in high school should
begin their studies at Vanderbilt in French 1101. Students with
high school French on their records must present a College
Board achievement test score in French to be placed correctly.
Students should consult their advisers or the Department of
French and Italian for advice on placement.
Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 169.

Italian
Students who have not studied Italian in high school should
begin their studies at Vanderbilt in Italian 1101.
Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may

College of Arts and Science / German, Russian and East European Studies

not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 185.

German, Russian and
East European Studies
CHAIR Lutz Koepnick
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN GERMAN
James McFarland
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN RUSSIAN
Jason Strudler
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Meike Werner
PROFESSORS EMERITI Konstantin V. Kustanovich, John A. McCarthy,
Richard Porter
PROFESSORS Barbara Hahn, Lutz Koepnick
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Emily Greble, James McFarland, Meike G.
Werner, Christoph Zeller
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Lydia Tang
MELLON ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Jason Strudler
Research Assistant Professor Wout Cornelissen
LECTURERS David Matthew Johnson, Silke Schade

THE Department of German, Russian and East European
Studies offers a broad array of courses taught in German,
Russian, or English on a wide variety of topics related to these
languages, cultures, histories, and societies. For students who
want to engage with German, Russian, or East European
culture in a more substantive way, the department offers
programs of concentration in German and in Russian.
The department sponsors lectures on topics related to
German, Russian and East European society and culture, films,
symposia, and other German- and Russian-themed activities.
Students are encouraged to apply for living space in McTyeire
International House in the German and Russian sections, and
German majors with sufficient academic qualifications are
invited to join Delta Phi Alpha, the national German honor
society.
Many students majoring in German enroll in study abroad
programs in Germany or Austria, and/or the Vanderbilt in
Berlin Program in conjunction with the Free University in
Berlin. Less formal activities, such as a weekly Kaffeestunde or
the Stammtisch at a local pizza parlor, are also open to undergraduates. For further information, please see as.vanderbilt.
edu/german.
The Russian program has a special commitment to undergraduate training in all aspects of Russian culture and language.
Thus, students are able to pursue their particular interests
within the Russian program while simultaneously being held
to a measurable standard. For further information, please see
as.vanderbilt.edu/russian.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

103

Program of Concentration in German Studies
Students majoring in German demonstrate advanced proficiency in oral and written German, as well as detailed understanding of significant aspects of German-speaking cultures,
histories, and societies. Students are required to complete
a total of 30 credit hours of course work beyond GER 1102,
including the following:
•

Core course: 2441

•

German language in context:
12 credit hours of 2201, 2202, 3201, 3202W

•

Electives in German culture and history
taught in German:
at least 9 credit hours of any course in German
between 4551–4558

•

Electives in German culture and history
taught in English:
at least 6 credit hours of courses taught in English
above 2441

		

3
12
9

6

Total credit hours: 30

Students are permitted to count a maximum of 6 credit
hours of instruction in courses outside the GER subject area
toward the major, with the approval of the director of undergraduate studies in German; such course work will count
toward the 6 credit hour total for elective courses in German
culture and history taught in English. Up to 6 credit hours
earned through AP exams or transferred from other institutions may count toward the major.

German Language Proficiency
In addition, students majoring in German will be tested for
language proficiency during their junior year and will be
required to submit a paper written for one of their courses due
the semester prior to graduation. The director of undergraduate studies in German should be consulted for details on these
special learning outcome assessments.

Honors Program in German Studies
Candidates for honors in German who meet College of Arts
and Science and departmental requirements must complete
all requirements for the concentration in German. In addition,
students
•

must study a minimum of one semester at a Germanspeaking university (or gain the equivalent experience);

•

complete 6 credit hours of beyond the basic course requirements; 3 of these credit hours are required to be taken in
the form of a graduate course above GER 7000, 3 of these
credit hours are required to be taken in the form of a
course taught in German above GER 4550;

•

maintain at least a 3.30 cumulative GPA in courses that count
toward the German major and a 3.30 cumulative GPA;

•

write an honors thesis and pass an oral examination during
their final semester.

Minor in German Studies
A minor in German documents a student’s basic competence
in the German language as well as familiarity with Germanspeaking culture. Students can fulfill the requirements of a

A&S

104

vanderbilt university

minor concentration in German by taking GER 2441, and 15
credit hours in the GER subject area, of which 6 credit hours
must be earned in courses taught in the German language, for
a total of 18 credit hours.

Vanderbilt in Berlin
The seven-week, 7 credit hour Vanderbilt in Berlin summer
program offers students an opportunity to study German,
improve German-language skills, and take courses in English
and German. This program is also open to students with no
prior knowledge of German. Students participate in a weeklong orientation course on the history and culture of Berlin (1
credit hour), then take two six-week courses (6 credit hours)
or one intensive language course (6 credit hours). All courses
include regular excursions to course-related locations. A
limited number of scholarships are available.

Goethe-Institut Certificate in Business German
Students completing GER 4558: Business German may take an
examination at a Goethe-Institut to obtain the Bulats DeutschTest für den Beruf, a certificate in business German recognized
by businesses worldwide. Further information is available on the
Goethe-Institut website: goethe.de/en/spr/kup/prf/prf/bul.html.

Program of Concentration in German and European
Studies
Students pursuing the interdisciplinary major in German and
European studies combine their focus on German language
and literature with a study of modern Europe in its political,
economic, and cultural diversity. The German and European
studies joint major consists of a minimum of 42 credit hours
of course work. A semester of study abroad in the Vanderbilt
in Germany program is recommended. Course work for the
major is distributed as follows:
German (24 credit hours)

•

Introduction to Contemporary Germany and Methods of
Cultural Analysis (6 credit hours): GER 3201 and 3202W

•

Great German Works (3 credit hours): GER 2441

•

German civilization (9 credit hours): any course between
GER 2551–2557, or appropriate substitute approved by the
director of undergraduate studies in German

•

German literature and culture (6 credit hours): any course
between GER 4551–4558

European Studies (18 credit hours)

Program of Concentration in Russian
Requirements for a concentration in Russian include a minimum of 30 credit hours of course work. Required courses are
RUSS 1101–1102, RUSS 2201–2202 (18 credit hours), and one
English-language course with the RUSS subject code (3 credit
hours; see the list of qualifying courses below). The remaining 9 credit hours may be earned either from Russian- and
English-language courses with the RUSS subject code (see the
list of qualifying courses below) or from other relevant courses
that will be approved by the director of undergraduate studies
on a case-by-case basis. A maximum of 6 credit hours toward
the concentration in Russian may be earned from courses
taken from other U.S. institutions or through study abroad
programs. AP and IB exam credit will not count toward credit
hours required for the concentration, but placement exams
will be offered for RUSS 1101 and/or 1102. Students concentrating in Russian will be expected to take an “assessment exam”
via colloquium prior to graduation.

Minor in Russian
Requirements for a minor in Russian include a minimum of
19 credit hours of course work. Required courses are RUSS
1101–1102 and one English-language course with the RUSS
subject code (3 credit hours; see the list of qualifying courses
below). The remaining 6 credit hours may be earned either
from Russian- and English-language courses with the RUSS
subject code (see the list of qualifying courses below) or from
other relevant courses that will be approved by the director of
undergraduate studies on a case-by-case basis. A maximum of
6 credit hours toward the Russian minor may be earned from
courses taken from other U.S. institutions or through study
abroad programs. AP and IB exam credit will not count toward
credit hours required for the minor, but placement exams will
be offered for RUSS 1101 and/or 1102.
English-language courses with the RUSS subject code that
qualify for the 3 credit hour requirement of the concentration
and minor in Russian: RUSS 1111, 1874, 1910W, 1911W, 2230,
2273, 2434, 2435, 2438, 2485, 2537, 2639 and 2745.
Russian- and English-language courses with the RUSS subject code that qualify for the remaining credit hours required for
the concentration and minor in Russian: RUSS 1001, 1111, 1874,
1910W, 1911W, 2201–2202 [only in the case of the minor], 2210,
2230, 2273, 2434, 2435, 2438, 2485, 2537, 2639, 2745, 3303, 3305,
3850–3851, 3880–3881, and 3890-3891.

Licensure for Teaching

•

European Studies core courses (9 credit hours): EUS 2201,
2203, and 4960 (requires thesis)

•

Social Science (3 credit hours): PSCI 2210, 3211 or appropriate substitute with the approval of the EUS adviser

•

History (3 credit hours): HIST 2720, 2260, 2270, 2280, 2290,
2300, or other appropriate course selected in consultation
with the EUS adviser

German

•

Humanities (3 credit hours): EUS 3890, 2260 (Berlin or
Vienna) or other appropriate course selected in consultation with the EUS adviser

Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught
in that same language. Students who have earned Advanced

Candidates for teacher licensure in German at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.

Students with some experience in German should consult the
department for placement.

College of Arts and Science / History

Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign
language will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level
course taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 171.

Russian
Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 211.

Hebrew
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Adam Meyer
LECTURER Yifat Crouvi

Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 174.

105
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Ari Bryen, Brandon Byrd, Celso Castilho,
Peter Lorge, Ole Molvig, Tasha Rijke-Epstein, Frank Robinson, Alistair
Sponsel, Kimberly Welch
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Jordan Downs, Matthew
Growhoski, Amy Gant Tan
SENIOR LECTURER Yollette T. Jones
LECTURERS Miriam M. Erickson, Alex Jacobs, Kara Schultz

MORE than one hundred courses in the Department of History
are available to Vanderbilt undergraduates. Some focus on a
particular historical period, others on a particular region of
the world, and still others on topics that may cross traditional
chronological and geographical boundaries. The department
is committed to the principle that in a changing world, the
way we learn about the past must also change. It will continue
to develop new courses for the twenty-first century, with an
emphasis on those that recognize the interconnections among
the various civilizations and regions of the globe.
Unless indicated otherwise in the course description,
history courses have no prerequisite. Except for History 3980,
4960, 4980–4981, and 4999, courses numbered below 5000 are
open to all majors and nonmajors. History 4960 is limited to
seniors and juniors who have previously taken History 3000W.
History 3980, 4980–4981, and 4999 are limited to students who
have been admitted to the History Honors Program.
Students will find that the study of history offers not only a
strong foundation for a liberal education but also a means of
understanding the contemporary world. The skills developed
in gathering, assessing, and synthesizing information have
wide application in many careers, including business and the
professions.
The Department of History offers a major and minor in history; a major in law, history, and society; and, in cooperation
with the Department of Economics, a joint major in economics
and history, which is described in this catalog under Economics and History.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in History

History
CHAIR Joel F. Harrington
VICE CHAIR Michael Bess
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Edward Wright-Rios
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES FOR LAW, HISTORY, AND
SOCIETY Edward Wright-Rios
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Samira Sheikh
PROFESSORS EMERITI Paul K. Conkin, Jimmie L. Franklin, Samuel T.
McSeveney, Matthew Ramsey, V. Jacque Voegeli, Donald L. Winters
PROFESSORS Celia Applegate, Lauren Benton, Michael D. Bess, David
Blackbourn, Richard J. M. Blackett, William Caferro, Jefferson Cowie,
Katherine B. Crawford, Dennis C. Dickerson, Marshall C. Eakin,
James A. Epstein, Gerald Figal, Joel F. Harrington, Yoshi Igarashi,
Peter Lake, Jane Gilmer Landers, Thomas McGinn, Moses Ochonu,
Thomas Alan Schwartz, Helmut Walser Smith, Arleen M. Tuchman,
Daniel H. Usner Jr., David Wasserstein, Rhonda Y. Williams, Edward
Wright-Rios
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS David Lee Carlton, Lauren Clay, Julia
Phillips Cohen, Emily Greble, Leor Halevi, Sarah Igo, Paul A. Kramer,
Catherine Molineux, Ruth Rogaski, Samira Sheikh, Francis W. Wcislo

The major program requires a minimum of 30 credit hours in
history; no more than 3 credit hours of AP or IB credit may
count toward this total. Note: AP and IB credit will not count
toward the 15 credit hours for the concentration.
Course work is distributed as follows:
1. 3000W or 3980 (3 credit hours)
Note: 3000W should be taken as soon as possible and must
be taken no later than the second semester of the junior year.
3000W is a prerequisite for the 4960 capstone course. 3980 is
limited to second-semester juniors who have been admitted to
the Honors Program. Students entering the Honors Program
who have already taken 3000W will receive elective credit for
that course.
2. Five courses in one of the following concentrations (15
credit hours):
A. Asia
B. Latin America
C. Europe
D. Early America and the United States
E. Middle East and Africa
F. Global and Transnational

A&S

106

vanderbilt university

G. Science, Medicine, and Technology
H. Comparative History/Special Topics
See below for a list of courses that count for Concentrations A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. Students choosing concentration
H must have the approval of their adviser and the director of
undergraduate studies for a specific program of study. FirstYear Writing Seminars (1111) in history may be used to satisfy
the relevant program concentration with approval of the director of undergraduate studies.
Program A. Asia
1050, 1060, 1070, 1080, 1085W, 1090, 1160, 1161, 1200, 1881,
1882W, 2100, 2105, 2110, 2115, 2119, 2120, 2140, 2145, 2150, 2160,
2180, 3090, 3110, 3112, 3190, 3220, 3230, and, as appropriate,
3746, 3850, 3882, 3883, 3890, 3980, 4960, 4980–4981, 4999;
ASIA 2511, 2630; MHS 2310.
Program B. Latin America
1368, 1370, 1378, 1380, 1383, 1385W, 1469, 1650, 2450, 2457,
2470, 2480, 2490, 2510, 2530, 2535, 2540, 2570, 2845, 3100, 3230,
3280, and, as appropriate, 3746, 3850, 3882, 3883, 3890, 3980,
4960, 4980–4981, and 4999; AADS 4256.
Program C. Europe
1200, 1345, 1350, 1355W, 1360, 1470, 1480, 1500, 1510, 1510L,
1520, 1580, 1582W, 1584W, 1600, 1695W, 1700, 1725W, 1760, 2130,
2135, 2140, 2160, 2170, 2190, 2220, 2230, 2238, 2240, 2250, 2260,
2270, 2280, 2290, 2293, 2300, 2310, 2340, 2380, 2382, 2383, 2385,
2410, 2450, 2595W, 2660, 2720, 2760, 2800, 2835, 2840, 3010, 3050,
3070W, 3100, 3110, 3120, 3150, 3180, 3190, 3210, 3230, 3240, 3260,
3270, 3275, and, as appropriate, 3746, 3850, 3882, 3883, 3890, 3980,
4960, 4980–4981, and 4999; Classics 2100, 2110, 2120, 2150, 2160,
2180; Economics 3160; EUS 2201, 2208, 2220; German 2442; Jewish Studies 1111.09, 1220, 1240, 2450, 2540, 3100, 3210; Philosophy
2100; Religious Studies 3316; Russian 2800.
Program D. Early America and the United States
1200, 1383, 1385W, 1390, 1395, 1400, 1410, 1420, 1422W, 1427W,
1430W,1438, 1440, 1469, 1480, 1500, 1520, 1640, 1650, 1660, 1665,
1667, 1690, 1691, 1693, 1725W, 1730, 1740, 1770, 1780W, 2119, 2240,
2530, 2535, 2580, 2590, 2595W, 2600, 2610, 2620, 2630, 2640, 2655,
2660, 2662, 2685, 2690, 2700, 2710, 2720, 2721, 2722, 2725, 2730,
2735, 2740, 2749, 2750, 2752, 2760, 2780, 2800, 2810, 2840, 2845,
2855, 2860, 3010, 3112, 3030, 3040, 3045W, 3050, 3070W, 3100,
3110, 3140, 3170, 3190, 3230, 3240, , and, as appropriate, 3746, 3850,
3882, 3883, 3890, 3980, 4960, 4980–4981, and 4999; AADS 2214;
Economics 2150, 3150; HOD 1115; Jewish Studies 1240, 2540, 2560;
Medicine, Health, and Society 2110.
Program E. Middle East and Africa
1161, 1190, 1200, 1269, 1270, 1280, 1281W, 1725W, 2137, 2138,
2139, 2140, 2155, 2160, 2170, 2180, 2190, 2510, 2660, 3150, 3190,
3200, 3210, 3230, and, as appropriate, 3746, 3850, 3882, 3883, 3890,
4960, 4980–4981, and 4999; AADS 2106; Classics 2180, 3010;
Jewish Studies 1111.09, 1200, 1220, 1240, 2540, 2600, 2620, 3210.
Program F. Global and Transnational
1190, 1200, 1280, 1345, 1368, 1370, 1378, 1380, 1383, 1385W,
1469, 1470, 1600, 1650, 1665, 1691, 1692, 1695W, 1700, 1740, 1881,
2110, 2130, 2135, 2137, 2138, 2139, 2140, 2150, 2160, 2170, 2180,
2190, 2238, 2450, 2457, 2480, 2490, 2530, 2535, 2540, 2570, 2595W,
2660, 2700, 2710, 2721, 2722, 2725, 2735, 2740, 2760, 2835, 2840,
3010, 3100, 3110, 3120, 3150, 3190, 3220, 3230, 3240, and, as appropriate, 3746, 3850, 3882, 3883, 3890, 3980, 4960, 4980–4981, and

4999; Classics 2120, 2180, 3010; Jewish Studies 1200, 1220, 1240,
2450, 2540, 2845, 3000, 3100; EUS 2220; Medicine, Health, and
Society 2110; Religious Studies 3306.
Program G. Science, Medicine, and Technology
Students may meet the requirement by taking five courses
from the SMT list, among which not more than two may be
courses outside the Department of History.
1385W, 1470, 1480, 1500, 1510, 1510L, 1520, 1780W, 2139,
2160, 2780, 2800, 2810, 3040, 3045W, 3050, 3070W, 3110, 3230,
and, as appropriate, 3746, 3850, 3882, 3883, 3890, 3980, 4960,
4980–4981, and 4999; Anthropology 4373; Asian Studies 2630;
Astronomy 2130; English 3720 or 3720W; Mathematics 3000;
Medicine, Health, and Society 2110, 2310, 2320, 2430; and
other courses, as appropriate, with approval of the director of
undergraduate studies.
3. Capstone course (3–6 credit hours)
One of the following, to be taken in the junior or senior year;
all of the options will require the student to write a major
paper. Any capstone course within the student’s area of concentration will count toward the five-course requirement for
that concentration.
Option 1: 3883, Internship Research (3 credit hours). Must be
taken in conjunction with 3880 (internship training). Prerequisite: 3000W. Note: a student may take 3883 as an elective before
completing 3000W but in this case 3883 will not count as a
capstone course.
Option 2: 4960, Majors Seminar (3 credit hours). Prerequisite: 3000W.
Option 3: 4980–4981, Senior Honors Seminar (6 credit hours).
Limited to seniors in the History Honors Program. Note: At
the discretion of the director of honors and the director of
undergraduate studies, a student who has taken 4980 but does
not take 4981 may be considered to have fulfilled the capstone
requirement for the major.
4. Electives (6–12 credit hours, depending on the nature of the
capstone course)

Program of Concentration in Law, History, and Society
As a human institution self-consciously aware of its past, “The
Law” raises a complex set of issues that can be addressed
historically. Legislation and jurisprudence, for example, allow
historians a privileged perspective into how societies sought to
define themselves, their values, and their membership. Constitutions provide maps of political power, and serve as sites of
struggle over goods both real and symbolic. Records of legal
practice are often well preserved, allowing access to the voices
and actions of people who are usually left out of systems of
political organization.
This major approaches law from both a historical and an
interdisciplinary perspective. Emphasis will be placed on close
reading of legal documents, research in legal archives, and analytical writing. Students will be encouraged to develop reading
programs and research topics that stretch across national and
chronological boundaries, and to think comparatively. Students may not major both in history and in law, history, and
society. Students majoring in law, history, and society may
apply to receive honors through the History Honors Program.
The major program requires a minimum of 30 credit hours
in history; no more than 3 credit hours of AP or IB credit may
count toward this total. Note: AP and IB credit will not count

College of Arts and Science / History of Art

toward the 15 credit hours for the concentration. No more than
6 credit hours may be from courses outside the Department of
History.
Course work is distributed as follows:
1. History Workshop. 3000W or 3980 (3 credit hours)
Note: 3000W should be taken as soon as possible and must
be taken no later than the second semester of the junior year.
3000W is a prerequisite for the 4960 capstone course. 3980 is
limited to second-semester juniors who have been admitted to
the Honors Program. Students entering the Honors Program
who have already taken 3000W will receive elective credit for
that course.
2. Law, History, and Society: Five courses from the following:
1345, 1383, 1385W, 1430W, 1580, 1584W, 1667, 2130, 2155, 2190,
2238, 2290, 2293, 2450, 2590, 2610, 2662, 2690, 2760, 2855, 2860,
3170, and, as appropriate, 3890, 3980, 4960, 4980–4981, and
4999; Classics 3150, 3160; Economics 4210; English 3734; French
4232; Jewish Studies 2150; Medicine, Health, and Society 2320;
Philosophy 1100, 3610, 3610W, 3623; Political Science 1103, 2208,
2226, 2262, 2265, 2266, 3260; RUSS 2485; Sociology 3605, 3611,
3613, 3621; 3624; WGS 3271, 3281; and other courses, as appropriate, with approval of the director of undergraduate studies of
Law, History, and Society.
Note: First-Year Writing Seminars (1111) in history may be
used to satisfy the relevant program concentration with approval
of the director of undergraduate studies of Law, History, and
Society.
3. Capstone course (3–6 credit hours)
One of the following, to be taken in the junior or senior
year; all of the options will require the student to write a major
paper, the topic of which must be approved by the director of
undergraduate studies of law, history, and society. Any capstone
course on a topic concerning law, history, and society will
count toward the five-course requirement for the program
concentration.
Option 1: 3883, Internship Research (3 credit hours).
Must be taken in conjunction with 3880 (internship training). Prerequisite: 3000W. Note: a student may take 3883 as an
elective before completing 3000W but in this case 3883 will not
count as a capstone course.
Option 2: 4960, Majors Seminar (3 credit hours).
Prerequisite: 3000W.
Option 3: 4980–4981, Senior Honors Seminar (6 credit
hours). Limited to seniors enrolled in the History Honors
Program.
Note: At the discretion of the director of honors and the
director of undergraduate studies in law, history, and society, a
student who has taken 4980 but does not take 4981 may be considered to have fulfilled the capstone requirement for the major.
4. Electives (6–12 credit hours in history, depending on the
nature of the capstone course)
Electives may include any courses, not used to satisfy any of
the above requirements, offered by the Department of History
or listed above in major requirement #2.

Honors Program
The Honors Program in History is a three-semester program
of study. It offers superior undergraduate history majors a
program of advanced reading, research, and writing. The
Honors Program combines seminar work and independent

107

study under the supervision of a thesis adviser. This structure
provides participants an introduction to historical research
and writing, as well as the opportunity to study defined areas
of history and significant historical problems that accord with
their own interests. The final objectives of the Honors Program
are successful authorship of the honors thesis and graduation
with honors or highest honors in the major.
Students apply to the Honors Program in the first semester
of the junior year. Students meeting college and departmental
requirements will enroll for a total of 12 credit hours: History
3980, Junior Honors Seminar in History (3 credit hours); History
4980–4981 Senior Honors Research Seminar (6 credit hours);
and 4999, Senior Honors Thesis (3 credit hours). In addition, the
Honors Program requires an oral defense of the honors thesis
before a faculty committee at the end of the third semester.

Program of Concentration in Economics and History
This is an interdisciplinary program split between economics
and history that provides a more focused program of study
while requiring fewer credit hours than a double major in
the two fields. See the Economics and History section of this
catalog for details.

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in history at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.

Minor in History
The minor in history requires a minimum of 18 credit hours in
courses that are offered by the Department of History or that
are listed above in programs A–G of the history major, among
which no more than two courses may be outside the Department of History. At least 9 credit hours must be taken at the
2000 level or higher. Students must complete 3000W. No more
than 3 credit hours of AP or IB credit may count toward this
total.
Course descriptions begin on page 174.

History of Art
CHAIR Kevin D. Murphy
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Sheri Shaneyfelt
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Betsey A. Robinson
PROFESSORS EMERITI Robert A. Baldwin, F. Hamilton Hazlehurst,
Milan Mihal, Robert L. Mode, Ljubica D. Popovich, Barbara Tsakirgis
PROFESSORS Leonard Folgarait, Vivien Green Fryd, Christopher M. S.
Johns, Kevin D. Murphy
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Tracy Miller, Elizabeth J. Moodey, Betsey A.
Robinson
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Mireille M. Lee, Rebecca K. VanDiver
MELLON ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Heeryoon Shin
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURER Sheri Shaneyfelt

THE Department of History of Art treats critically the major
fields in world art, from ancient to contemporary, and serves
to connect the arts to the other humanities. Many students will
use the program in history of art as a foundation for careers in
which analytical reading and writing skills gained in the major

A&S

108

are especially valued: as the basis for advanced training in professional schools (such as architecture, law, medicine, journalism, and business), for postgraduate work in history of art, and
for employment in galleries, museums, or design-related fields.
A major goal of the department is to help students become
readers of visual images and material culture throughout their
lives, as well as to encourage visual approaches to learning.
Majors in history of art participate in the activities of
the Vanderbilt History of Art Society and work closely with
departmental advisers. The society sponsors events such as
panels, lectures, debates, and other programs where majors
meet and engage in discussions with historians of art and
museum curators.
The department curriculum complements those of related
departments and programs, including African American and
Diaspora Studies, American Studies, Asian Studies, Cinema
and Media Arts, Classical and Mediterranean Studies, European Studies, Latin American Studies, Religious Studies, and
Women’s and Gender Studies.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration
The history of art major requires 30 credit hours and gives
students the opportunity to study art and visual culture across
a wide range of historical periods, from ancient to contemporary. The program is designed to allow for concentration in
particular periods and areas of interest. By requiring courses
in both the lecture and seminar format, the program aims to
provide a basis of comprehensive knowledge and challenging
opportunities for more specialized instruction.
Students should consider related offerings in cognate
disciplines in the humanities and social sciences. Those planning
graduate work in history of art should pursue advanced studies—
which may include honors—and take advanced courses in other
departments offering complementary course work. Advanced
language studies are strongly recommended, as graduate programs expect reading facility in one language for the M.A. and
two for the Ph.D., with French and German the most commonly
required. Non-European languages should be considered for
those primarily interested in non-Western traditions.

Requirements for the Program of Concentration
A 1000-level course (3 credit hours): Students must complete
one 1000-level survey course in history of art or architecture
selected from HART 1100, 1105, 1120 or 1121, 1200, 1205, 1220,
1300, or 1400. This course is not a prerequisite for further history
of art course work but must be taken at Vanderbilt; AP and
transfer credit will not be accepted.
Area requirements (15 credit hours)—five history of art
courses at the 2000 level or above, one each from the following
areas:
a. Ancient: HART 2210, 2220, 2260, 3224, 3226, 3228W,
3240W, 3252, 3272; CLAS 2200, 2210, 2250, 3200, 3210
b. Medieval: HART 2270, 2275, 2285, 2288, 2290, 3274
c. Renaissance/Baroque: HART 2310, 2320W, 2325, 2330,
2362, 2390, 3320, 3320W, 3332, 3334, 3334W, 3364W
d. Modern: HART 2600, 2620, 2622, 2625, 2650, 2660, 2665,
2710, 2720, 2722, 2750, 2755, 2760, 2765, 3605W, 3718W,
3725W, 3740, 3767W

vanderbilt university

e. Non-Western: HART 2110, 2130, 2150, 2170, 2175, 2180,
2192, 3112, 3140, 3164W
Electives (6 credit hours)—two upper-level courses in history
of art (HART 2110 to 3850 and 3890) in addition to the area
requirements.
Advanced Seminars (6 credit hours)—HART 4960

Honors Program
The Honors Program in History of Art allows exceptional
undergraduate students to undertake independent research
on a topic in art history in consultation with faculty members. The program is open to all history of art majors with
junior standing who meet a 3.30 grade point average in all
university courses and a 3.30 grade point average in history of
art courses. They must also be approved for acceptance into
the honors program by the department faculty. Completion
of the program requires 9 credit hours of study: HART 3850,
Independent Research (the second semester of the junior year,
unless studying abroad, in which case one is expected to enroll
in this class the first semester of the junior year); HART 4998,
Honors Research (first semester of the senior year); and HART
4999, Honors Thesis (second semester of the senior year);
submission of an honors thesis; and successful completion of
an oral honors examination. These independent research-credit
hours are expected to be in addition to the 30 credit hours
required for the major in history of art. Students meeting these
requirements receive honors or highest honors in history of
art, depending on the quality of the thesis, grades in history of
art courses, and examination results. Successful departmental
honors students will receive a Vanderbilt diploma that records
honors or highest honors in history of art.

Minor in History of Art
The minor in history of art requires 18 credit hours of course
work, including the following:
Two 1000-level courses from 1100, 1105, 1120 or 1121, 1200,
1205, 1220, 1300, or 1400, plus any four upper-level history
of art courses (HART 2110 to 3850 and 3890, 4960), and
classes designated CLAS 2200, 2210, 2250, 3200, 3210,
3720.

Minor in History of Architecture
The minor in history of architecture requires 18 credit hours of
course work, including the following:
Two 1000-level courses from 1100, 1105, 1120 or 1121, 1200, 1205,
1220, 1300, or 1400, plus four upper-level history of art
courses selected from HART 2110, 2130, 2150, 2175, 2180,
2210, 2220, 2270, 2275, 2285, 2290, 2650, 2665, 2720, 2722,
2780, 2782, 3112, 3140, 3240W, 3252, 3725W, 3790, and CLAS
2200, 2210, 2250, 3200, 3210, 3720.
Course descriptions begin on page 181.

College of Arts and Science / Jewish Studies

109

Honors

Interdisciplinary Studies

NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

COURSES designated “Honors” are parts of a special honors
program in liberal education. They may be taken only by students who have been appointed College Scholars by the dean
of the College of Arts and Science. Some College Scholars are
appointed before they arrive for their first semester in residence; others may be appointed on the basis of their records
in that first semester. All first-year students in the College of
Arts and Science may apply to the associate dean for honors
programs for admission to the College Scholars program; only
first-year students are considered for admission.
Honors seminars offered in the College Scholars program
provide an especially interesting and challenging way for
College Scholars to complete certain parts of the program for
Achieving Excellence in Liberal Education (AXLE). They are
designed to cover topics through the intensive analysis afforded
by the seminar setting and format. An honors seminar will
satisfy the requirement for a first-year writing seminar. Honors 1810W, 1820W, 1830W, 1840W, 1850W, and 1860W count
toward the AXLE requirements identified by the seminars’ titles.
Honors 1810W challenges students to examine their personal
understanding of life and how their individual experiences overlap with those of the rest of human kind. Honors 1820W gives
significant attention to individual and cultural diversity, multicultural interactions, sexual orientation, gender, racial, ethical,
religious, and “Science and Society” issues. Honors 1830W studies human behavior at the levels of individuals, their interactions
with others, their societal structures, and their social institutions.
Honors 1840W provides students with a basis for understanding
the American experience and the shaping of American values
and viewpoints within the context of an increasingly global
society. Honors 1850W emphasizes quantitative reasoning and
prepares students to describe, manipulate, and evaluate complex
or abstract ideas or arguments with precision. Honors 1860W
provides a basis for understanding the diversity of experiences
and values in our contemporary, global society.
In addition to regular credit hours and grade points, honors seminars carry honors points toward graduation with the
designation “Honors in the College of Arts and Science.” College
Scholars must earn fifteen honors points to receive that designation (they are not required to earn this designation but may take
as many honors seminars as they wish). They may earn up to
thirteen of the required fifteen points in honors seminars: three
points each for the first time they take Honors 1810W, 1820W,
1830W, 1840W, 1850W, or 1860W; one point if they take a second
seminar in the same area. Single honors points may be earned
(a) in departmental honors sections of regular courses, (b) in
independent study approved by the associate dean for honors
programs, and (c) in a regular course in which an enriched curriculum approved by the Committee on the Honors Program is
pursued. Honors points are only earned for courses in which the
student earns the grade B or better.

Any student who is at least a sophomore and in good academic
standing may earn one credit hour per semester or summer
for an internship completed under the designation INDS
3880/3884(summer) exclusively on a Pass/Fail basis. This course
may be repeated twice for a maximum of three credit hours.
Students are responsible for obtaining their own internship and
faculty adviser. The student and faculty adviser work together to
plan the academic project associated with the internship. Their
agreement must be approved by Associate Dean Yollette Jones.

Course descriptions begin on page 185.

Course descriptions begin on page 185.

Jewish Studies
DIRECTOR Allison Schachter
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR Adam Meyer
PROFESSORS Robert F. Barsky, Lenn Goodman, Amy-Jill Levine,
David J. Wasserstein
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Phillip Ackerman-Lieberman, Julia Phillips
Cohen, Nathalie Debrauwere-Miller, Idit Dobbs-Weinstein, Jay Geller,
Ari Joskowicz, Shaul Kelner, Adam Meyer, Allison Schachter
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Nina Warnke
SENIOR LECTURER Judith Klass
LECTURER Yifat Crouvi

JEWISH Studies at Vanderbilt offers an interdisciplinary
academic program that facilitates the critical study of Jewish
history, religion, language, philosophy, politics, culture, society,
music, art, and literature across continents and over three millennia. Integral to understanding crucial moments in the formation of Christianity and Islam as well as distinct episodes in
the cultures of the modern Middle East, Europe, and America,
the program accesses the resources of the entire university to
explore Judaism, its evolution and expression from biblical
times to the present. This interdisciplinary program reflects
Vanderbilt’s commitment to advancing the understanding of
diverse cultures and traditions. Students of all backgrounds
will find in Jewish Studies at Vanderbilt a wide array of material and methodologies, presented by scholars from history,
anthropology, sociology, religious studies, philosophy, literature, and history of art. Students may focus on several areas
of concentration and tailor the major to their academic and
career interests. They also have access to courses offered by the
schools of divinity, education, and music; they have access to
the Zimmerman Judaica collection as well as the opportunity
to study abroad, pursue internships locally or nationally, and
do research in archives overseas. The interdisciplinary nature
of Jewish Studies offers excellent preparation for graduate
studies and provides an outstanding academic foundation for
a variety of rewarding career paths. Visit as.vanderbilt.edu/
jewishstudies for more details.

A&S

110
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Jewish Studies
The major in Jewish studies requires a minimum of 30 credit
hours.
1. Foundational course, 3 credit hours. JS 1002 or 1002W, Introduction to Jewish Studies.
2. Language, 6 credit hours. A year of modern Hebrew (Hebrew
2201–2202, Intermediate Hebrew) or biblical Hebrew (REL
5120, Intermediate Hebrew).* Proficiency at the level of
intermediate Hebrew can be demonstrated through testing.
If this option is exercised, students will take an additional 6
credit hours of electives toward the major.
		
*In place of biblical or modern Hebrew, interested
students may substitute one of the following languages
of the Jewish people: Rabbinic Hebrew, Aramaic, Yiddish,
Ladino, or Judaeo-Arabic. For languages not presently
taught at Vanderbilt, proficiency at the intermediate level
may be demonstrated through an exam administered by
a designated member of the Jewish Studies faculty. If this
option is exercised, students will take an additional 6 credit
hours of electives toward the major.
3. Focus courses, 12 credit hours selected from three of four
subfields of study:
• Area 1: Biblical Studies
• Area 2: Antiquity and the Medieval World
• Area 3: Modern and Contemporary Experience
• Area 4: Culture, Philosophy, and Literature
4. Senior capstone course, 3 credit hours. JS 4970, Senior Project
in Jewish Studies. Senior Project proposal must be approved
by the director of undergraduate studies.
5. Electives (minimum of 6 credit hours)—Any of the courses
listed below that are not used to fulfill a requirement
towards the major may be counted as an elective with
the exception of JS 3880, which cannot count toward the
major because it must be taken Pass/Fail. In addition to
courses drawn from Arts and Science departments and the
professional schools, nontraditional course work may also
be selected, including archaeology at Tel Megiddo (Israel),
service learning, and internships. Study abroad is encouraged and can be fulfilled with CET Jewish Studies in Prague
and at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

Honors Program
The Honors Program in Jewish Studies offers superior students a more intensive concentration within their major field.
Admission to the program requires:
1. A 3.3 cumulative grade point average.
2. A 3.3 cumulative grade point average in Jewish Studies.
3. Completion of the junior year.
Requirements for graduation with honors in Jewish Studies are:
1. 6 credit hours in Honors sections (JS 4980–4981), including completion of thesis—these credit hours may count
as elective credit toward the major. Honors thesis is to be
completed by mid-spring of the senior year.

vanderbilt university

2. Successful completion of an honors oral examination on
the topic of the thesis.

Minor in Jewish Studies
The minor in Jewish studies provides a basic understanding of
Jewish history and culture across continents and the past three
millennia. The minor requires a minimum of 18 credit hours.
1. Foundational course, 3 credit hours. JS 1002 or 1002W, Introduction to Jewish Studies.
2. Focus courses, 6 credit hours. (See major for categories.)
3. Electives (minimum of 9 credit hours)
Any of the courses listed below that are not used to fulfill a
requirement toward the minor may be counted as an elective.
Special Topics courses or First-Year Writing Seminar courses
dealing with topics related to Jewish studies may be counted
with the approval of the program director.
LANGUAGE: Jewish Studies: 4301, Jewish Language and Paleography. Classics: 3300, Akkadian. Hebrew (Modern Hebrew): 1101–1102,
Elementary Hebrew; 2201–2202, Intermediate Hebrew; 2301, Advanced
Hebrew Grammar; 2302W, Advanced Hebrew Composition; 3851–3852;
Independent Study in Modern Hebrew.
AREA 1. BIBLICAL STUDIES: Jewish Studies: 2100, The New Testament
in Its Jewish Contexts. English: 3370, The Bible in Literature. Music Literature: 2310, The Bible and Music. Religious Studies: 1200, Introduction to Judaism; 1208, Themes in the Hebrew Bible; 3225, Sexuality in the
Hebrew Bible and the Ancient Near East; 3926, Ancient Goddesses; 4938,
Marriage in the Ancient Near East and the Hebrew Bible.
AREA 2. ANTIQUITY AND THE MEDIEVAL WORLD: Jewish Studies:
1111.01, In a Pluralistic Age: Jews, Christians, and Muslims in Spain; 1200,
Classical Judaism: Jews in Antiquity; 1220, Jews in the Medieval World;
2150, Issues in Rabbinic Literature; 2600, Islam and the Jews; 2620,
Jews in Egypt; 2640, Jews and Greeks; 3210, Reading across Boundaries: Jewish and Non-Jewish Texts; 3892, Topics in Ancient and Medieval
Jewish History. Anthropology: 1101, Introduction to Archaeology; 3202,
The Collapse of Civilizations. Classics: 2100, History of the Ancient Near
East; 2120, Greece and the Near East from Alexander to Theodosius;
2160, History of Roman Empire; 3010, The Ancient Origins of Religious
Conflict in the Middle East. History: 2160, Medicine in Islam; 2170, Islam
and the Crusades; 3210, Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Medieval Spain.
History of Art: 2260, The Art of Pagans, Christians, and Jews. Philosophy: 2101, Hellenistic and Late Ancient Philosophy; 2102, Medieval Philosophy. Religious Studies: HUM1610,The Golden Age of Islam; 4554,
The Qur’an and Its Interpreters.
AREA 3. MODERN AND CONTEMPORARY EXPERIENCE: Jewish Studies: 1111.03, Radical Jews from Karl Marx to Noam Chomsky; 1111.07,
From Einstein to Chomsky: Revolutionary Sciences in Jewish America;
1111.09, Jews and Muslims: A Modern History; 1240, Perspectives in
Modern Jewish History; 2220, Israeli Culture Through Film; 2300, Modern
Jewish Thought; 2400, American Jewish Life; 2450, The Jewish Diaspora;
2500, Modern Israel; 2540, Power and Diplomacy in the Modern Middle
East; 2560, Social Movements in Modern Jewish Life; 3100, The Holocaust; 3830, Contemporary Jewish Issues; 3883, Internship Research;
3894, Topics in Modern Jewish History. European Studies: 2208, Conspiracy Theories and Rumors in European and U.S. History. German:
1111, Representing the Holocaust. History: 1111.18, The Life, Science,
and Times of Albert Einstein; 2130, Russia: Old Regime to Revolution;
2135, Russia: The U.S.S.R. and Afterward; 2190, Last Empire of Islam;
2300, Twentieth-Century Germany; 2720, World War II; 3150, Cities of
Europe and the Middle East. Political Science: 2230, Middle East Politics. Religious Studies: 2210W, Constructions of Jewish Identity in the
Modern World; 3229, The Holocaust: Its Meanings and Implications; 4939,
Religious Autobiography. Sociology: 3702, Racial and Ethnic Minorities in
the United States.

College of Arts and Science / Latin American Studies
AREA 4. CULTURE, PHILOSOPHY, AND LITERATURE: Jewish Studies:
1111.02, Music and Identity in Jewish Traditions; 1111.04, Civil Rights and
Civil Wrongs: Black–Jewish Relations in the 1950s and 1960s; 1111.05,
Gender, Sexuality, and Desire in Jewish Literature; 1111.06, Reading across
the Boundaries: Arab and Israeli Literature and Culture; 1111.10, Jewish
Response to Catastrophe; 2210W, Hebrew Literature in Translation; 2230W,
American Southern Jews in Life and Literature; 2240W, Black–Jewish Relations in Post-War American Literature and Culture; 2250W, Witnesses Who
Were Not There: Literature of the Children of Holocaust Survivors; 2260,
Coming of Age in Jewish Literature and Film; 2260W, Coming of Age in
Jewish Literature and Film; 2270, Jewish Storytelling; 2270W, Jewish Storytelling; 2280, Jewish Humor; 2280W, Jewish Humor; 2290W, Imagining
the Alien: Jewish Science Fiction; 2320, Freud and Jewish Identity; 2330, Is
G–d Guilty? The Problem of Evil in Judaism; 2340, Jewish Philosophy after
Auschwitz; 2420W, American Jewish Music; 2520, Zionism: Politics, Religion, and Ethnicity; 3000, Major Themes in Jewish Studies. English: 3664,
Jewish American Literature. French: 4430, The Struggle of Encounter:
The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict in Literature. German: 2445, Nazi Cinema:
The Manipulation of Mass Culture; 3344, Women at the Margins: GermanJewish Women Writers. History of Art: 2765, Art since 1945. Music Literature: 2150, Music, Identity, and Diversity. Philosophy: 2109, TwentiethCentury Continental Philosophy; 3005, Jewish Philosophy; 3006, Islamic
Philosophy; 3011, Critical Theory. Religious Studies: 2220, Jewish Ethics;
2940, Great Books of Literature and Religion; 3270, Jewish Theories of
Religion; 3940, The Nature of Evil. Russian: 2434, The Russian Cinema.
Sociology: 3204, Tourism, Culture, and Place; 3222, Sociology of Religion.
Course descriptions begin on page 187.

Latin American Studies
DIRECTOR Edward F. Fischer
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Avery Dickins de Girón
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES,
AND DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Nicolette Kostiw
LATIN AMERICAN BIBLIOGRAPHER Paula Covington
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Robert Barsky (French and Italian), Richard Blackett
(History), John Brock (Medicine), Ellen Clayton (Medicine), Daniel
Cornfield (Sociology), Pelayo Correa (Medicine), Arthur A. Demarest
(Anthropology), Tom D. Dillehay (Anthropology), Marshall Eakin
(History), David J. Ernst (Physics), Edward F. Fischer (Anthropology),
Earl E. Fitz (Portuguese), Leonard Folgarait (History of Art), Edward
H. Friedman (Spanish), Lesley Gill (Anthropology), Ruth Hill (Spanish),
Doug Heimburger (Medicine), David Hess (Sociology), Vera Kutzinski
(English), Jane G. Landers (History), Lorraine Lopez (English), William
Luis (Spanish), Terry Maroney (Law), Peter Martin (Medicine), Beverly
Moran (Law), Philip D. Rasico (Spanish), Fernando Segovia (Divinity),
Mitchell A. Seligson (Political Science), Randall Thomas (Law), Benigno
Trigo (Spanish), Sten Vermund (Medicine), Bart Victor (Management),
Edward Wright-Rios (History), Andrés Zamora (Spanish), Elizabeth
Zechmeister (Political Science), Mel Ziegler (Art)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Dominique Béhague (Medicine, Health,
and Society), Victoria Burrus (Spanish and Portuguese), Beth
A. Conklin (Anthropology), Markus Eberl (Anthropology), Quentin
Eichbaum (Medicine), Carol Etherington (Nursing), William R. Fowler
Jr. (Anthropology), Carlos Grijalva (Medicine), Guilherme Gualda
(Earth and Environmental Sciences), Elizabeth Heitman (Medicine),
Jonathan Hiskey (Political Science), Suzanne Herculano-Houzel
(Psychology), John Janusek (Anthropology), John Johns (Music),
Christina Karageorgou-Bastea (Spanish), Noam Lupu (Political
Science), Paul B. Miller (French and Latin American Studies), Douglas
Morgan (Medicine), Ifeoma Nwankwo (English), Emanuelle OliveiraMonte (Portuguese), Cynthia Paschal (Engineering), Tiffany Patterson

111
(African American and Diaspora Studies), Vesna Pavlovic (Art), Efrén
O. Pérez (Political Science), Norbert O. Ross (Anthropology), Mariano
Sana (Sociology), Mavis Schorn (Nursing), Jose Sibaja (Music), Jada
Benn Torres (Anthropology), Tiffiny A. Tung (Anthropology), Steven
A. Wernke (Anthropology), Gilman Whiting (African American and
Diaspora Studies)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Candice Amich (English), Adriana
Bialostozky (Medicine), Carwil Bjork‑James (Anthropology), Corey
Brady (Education), José Cárdenas Bunsen (Spanish), Kathryn Carlson
(Medicine), Ashley Carse (Education), Celso Castilho (History), Ana
Christina da Silva Iddings (Education), Neerav Desai (Medicine),
Andrew Dustan (Economics), Federico Gutierrez (Economics), Brian
Heuser (Education), Maria Luisa Jorge (Earth and Environmental
Sciences), Marzia Milazzo (English), Cecilia Hyunjung Mo (Political
Science), Alicia Monroe (African American and Diaspora Studies),
Alistair Newbern (Law), Yolanda Redero (Law), W. Frank Robinson
(History), Susan G. Stewart (Astronomy), Sarah Vanhooser Suiter
(Education), Thomas Verrier (Music), Zina Yzquierdo (Education),
Carol Ziegler (Nursing)
SENIOR LECTURERS Frances Alpren (Spanish), Ana Regina Andrade
(Economics), Jose Aznar (Spanish), Joe Bandy (Sociology), Lorraine
Catanzaro (Spanish), Rachel Chiguluri (Spanish), Paula Covington
(Latin American Studies), Sarah Delassus (Spanish), Avery Dickins de
Girón (Latin American Studies), Heraldo Falconi (Spanish), Victoria
Gardner (Spanish), Chalene Helmuth (Spanish), Clint Hendrix (Spanish),
Nicolette Kostiw (Latin American Studies), Benjamin Legg (Portuguese),
Alicia Lorenzo (Spanish), Natasha McClure (Nursing), Ryan Middagh
(Music), Spring Miller (Law), Patrick Murphy (Spanish), Michael Newton
(Law), Elena Olazagasti-Segovia (Spanish), Amarillis Ortiz (Spanish),
David Owens (Management), Carolina Palacios (Spanish), Gina
M. Perez (Medicine), Maria Paz Pintane (Spanish), Mareike Sattler
(Anthropology), James Schorr (Management), Waldir Sepúlveda
(Spanish), Jeff Shenton (Anthropology), Cynthia Wasick (Spanish),
Catesby Yant (Anthropology)

DESIGNATED by the U.S. Department of Education as a
National Resource Center for Latin America, Vanderbilt’s Center
for Latin American Studies draws on departmental strengths
and faculty expertise from across campus. Integrating teaching,
research, and service, the center maintains substantive collaborations with all of Vanderbilt’s colleges and schools. The center
has special strengths in Maya studies, Brazilian studies, Andean
studies, and the Black Atlantic, as well as unique library collections of Colombiana. Programs of instruction provided by the
center promote greater understanding of the region’s history,
culture, political economy, and social organization and cultivate
the ability to think strategically about global issues.
Faculty and courses come from the Departments of
Anthropology, Economics, History, History of Art, Political
Science, Sociology, and Spanish and Portuguese as well as from
Vanderbilt’s education, engineering, law, management, medical,
music, and nursing schools. The center fosters a lively research
community on campus by sponsoring colloquia, conferences,
films, and a speaker series that brings distinguished scholars, government and business leaders, and social activists to
campus.
For undergraduates, the Program in Latin American
Studies offers an interdisciplinary undergraduate major and a
minor in Latin American studies, as well as a minor in Brazilian studies. The program also offers summer opportunities in
Brazil and Guatemala, and facilitates study abroad and service
learning opportunities in Latin American countries. An honors program is available.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

A&S

112

vanderbilt university

Program of Concentration in Latin American Studies
The major in Latin American studies consists of 36 credit
hours plus a language requirement.
I. Language requirement
II. Core courses
III. Distribution requirements
IV. Area of concentration
V. Electives

demonstrated proficiency
6 credit hours
12 credit hours
12 credit hours
6 credit hours

Note: No course may be counted twice in calculating the 36
credit hours. Upon approval of the Committee on Individual
Programs and the student’s adviser, (a) as many as 6 credit hours
may be counted as part of both the interdisciplinary major and a
second major, or (b) normally, no more than three introductorylevel courses will be counted toward the interdisciplinary major.
I. Language Requirement. A student must acquire advanced
knowledge of one Latin American language (Spanish, Portuguese, or an indigenous language) and an intermediate knowledge in another Latin American language. The requirement
to acquire advanced knowledge of a Latin American language
may be satisfied by completing Spanish 3303, or any course
with a higher number taught in Spanish, or any course with
a higher number taught in Portuguese. The requirement to
acquire intermediate knowledge of another Latin American
language may be satisfied by successfully completing Spanish
2203, Portuguese 2203, or K’iche’ 1101 (formerly Anthropology
2612 indigenous language) Intro to a Maya Language. Individual standardized testing may also be used to demonstrate
knowledge.
II. Core Courses (6 credit hours)
LAS 2101, Introduction to Latin America
LAS 4901, Research Seminar
III. Distribution Requirements (12 credit hours). Two
relevant classes in two of the following three areas not chosen
as the major area of concentration.
A) History
B) Language, Literature, and Art History (Departments of
Spanish & Portuguese and History of Art)
C) Social Sciences (Departments of Anthropology, Economics, Political Science, Sociology).
IV. Area of Concentration (12 credit hours from one of the
following areas; special topics and independent study courses
must be approved for sufficient LAS content by major adviser):
A. History.
HISTORY: 1370, Colonial Latin America; 1378, Social Movements in Latin
America, 1780–1912; 1380, Modern Latin America; 2450, Reform, Crisis,
and Independence in Latin America, 1700–1820; 2470, Modern Mexico;
2480, Central America; 2490, Brazilian Civilization; 2510, Reform and Revolution in Latin America; 2530, African Religions in the Americas; 2535, Latin
America and the United States; 2540, Race and Nation in Latin America;
2570, Caribbean History, 1492–1983; 3280, Popular Cultures in Modern
Latin America; 3850, Independent Study; 3890, Selected Topics in History.
LATIN AMERICAN STUDIES: 2102, Introduction to Brazil.
B. Language, Literature, History of Art.
AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 1706, Capoeira: AfroBrazilian Race, Culture, and Expression; 2148, Blacks in Latin America

and the Caribbean; 2356, African Spirits in Exile: Diaspora Religions in the
Americas; 3248, Atlantic African Slave Trade.
CREOLE: 1101, Elementary Creole I; 1102, Elementary Creole II; 2201, Intermediate Creole I; 2202, Intermediate Creole II.
HISTORY OF ART: 3718W, Twentieth-Century Mexican Art: Painting, Cinema, Literature; 3850, Independent Research; 4960, Advanced Seminar.
K’ICHE’: 1101, Elementary K’ICHE’ I; 1102, Elementary K’ICHE’ II; 2201,
Intermediate K’ICHE’ I; 2202, Intermediate K’ICHE’ II.
LATIN AMERICAN STUDIES: 2102, Introduction to Brazil; 2301, Music of
Protest and Social Change in Latin America; 4550, Gender, Sexuality, and
Family in Latin America.
PORTUGUESE: 1103, Intensive Elementary Portuguese; 2203, Intermediate Portuguese; 3301, Portuguese Composition and Conversation; 3302,
Brazilian Pop Culture; 3303, Introduction to Luso-Brazilian Literature; 3850,
Independent Study; 3892, Special Topics in Portuguese Language, Literature, or Civilization; 4350, Brazilian Culture through Native Material; 4420,
Brazilian Literature through the Nineteenth Century; 4425, Modern Brazilian
Literature.
SPANISH: 2203, Intermediate Spanish; 2995, Contemporary Latin American Prose Fiction in English Translation; 3303, Introduction to Spanish and
Spanish American Literature; 3320, Introduction to Hispanic Cultural Studies; 3330, Cultural Studies in the Andes; 3340, Advanced Conversation;
3345, Spanish for Business and Economics; 3350, Spanish for the Legal
Profession; 3355, Advanced Conversation through Cultural Issues in Film;
3360, Spanish Civilization; 3375, Film and Culture in Latin America; 3830,
Spanish for the Medical Profession; 3835, Latino Immigration Experience;
3850, Independent Study; 3891, Special Topics in Hispanic Culture; 3892,
Special Topics in Spanish Language and Linguistics; 3893, Special Topics
in Hispanic Literature; 4310, Translation and Interpretation; 4325, Dialectology; 4340, History of the Spanish Language; 4400, The Origins of Spanish
Literature; 4405, Literature of the Spanish Golden Age; 4415, Spanish Literature from 1900 to the Present; 4420, Spanish American Literature from
the Conquest to 1900; 4425, Spanish American Literature from 1900 to
the Present; 4440, Development of the Short Story; 4445, Development of
the Novel; 4450, The Contemporary Novel; 4455, Development of Drama;
4465, The Theory and Practice of Drama; 4470, Development of Lyric Poetry; 4620, Love and Honor in Medieval and Golden Age Literature; 4640,
Don Quixote; 4720, Literary Genres and National Identities in Latin America;
4725, Jungle Narratives in Latin America; 4730, Modern Latin American
Poetry; 4750, Afro-Hispanic Literature; 4755, Latina and Latin American
Women Writers; 4760, Literature and Medicine; 4810, Images of the City.
C. Social and Natural Sciences.
ANTHROPOLOGY: 2105, Race in the Americas; 2106, Culture and Power
in Latin America; 2108, Indigenous Peoples of Lowland South America;
2231, Ancient Andean Civilizations; 2603, Comparative Writing Systems;
3122, The Anthropology of Globalization; 3130, Andean Culture and Society; 3133, Political Anthropology; 3134, Human Rights of Indigenous Peoples; 3140, Myth, Ritual, Belief: The Anthropology of Religion; 3141, Anthropology of Healing; 3143, Medical Anthropology; 3161, Colonial Encounters
in the Americas; 3200, Ancient Cities; 3202, The Collapse of Civilizations;
3240, Ancient Mesoamerican Civilizations; 3241, The Aztecs; 3242, The
Archaeology of the Ancient Maya Civilization; 3243, Classic Maya Religion
and Politics; 3250, The Inca Empire; 3850–3851, Independent Research;
3890, Special Topics.
ECONOMICS: 2220, Latin American Development; 3600, International
Trade; 3650, Development Economics; 3851–3852, Independent Study in
Economics; 4520W, Seminar on Globalization.
Note: Students who successfully complete an Economics course on this list
numbered 4520W or higher may also receive Area of Concentration credit
for successfully completing either Economics 3010 or 3020.
MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 3210, Health, Development, and Culture in Guatemala; 3212, Health, Development, and Culture in Guatemala.

College of Arts and Science / Latino and Latina Studies
POLITICAL SCIENCE: 2213, Democratization and Political Development;
2219, Politics of Mexico; 2225, International Political Economy; 3217,
Latin American Politics; 3228, International Politics of Latin America; 3897,
Selected Topics; 3851–3852, Independent Research.
SOCIOLOGY: 3232, Contemporary Mexican Society; 3322, Immigration in
America; 3851, Independent Research and Writing.

113

5. 3 credit hours from Area III: Brazil in Regional and Global
Context

Areas of Study
Area of Study I: Portuguese Language and Literature

V. Electives (6 credit hours). Any two classes listed above (or
others approved by the major adviser).

PORTUGUESE: 3301, Portuguese Composition and Conversation; 3303,
Introduction to Luso-Brazilian Literature; 4420, Brazilian Literature through
the Nineteenth Century; 4425, Modern Brazilian Literature.

Honors Program

Area of Study II: Brazilian Society, History, and Cultures

An honors program is available, acceptance into which must
be approved by the director of undergraduate studies. Students
must have a minimum 3.3 cumulative GPA and a 3.3 GPA in
courses that count toward the Latin American studies major to
be accepted into the program. The Honors Program requires:
completion of 6 credit hours in LAS 3851 and 3852; the writing
of an honors thesis; and passing an oral honors examination.
Interested students should consult their academic adviser during
their junior year.
HONORS: 1860W, Honors Seminar: International

Minor in Latin American Studies
Students must complete 15 credit hours of approved courses with
Latin American content including Latin American Studies 2101.
In addition, students must demonstrate intermediate knowledge
of one Latin American language by successfully completing
Spanish 2203, Portuguese 2203, or K’iche’ 1101 (indigenous
language). Courses taken to satisfy the language requirement
may not be counted toward the 15 credit hours of core courses.
Individual standardized testing may also be used to demonstrate
knowledge.
Course selection must be approved by the undergraduate
adviser of the Program in Latin American Studies.

Minor in Brazilian Studies
The Program in Latin American Studies also offers a minor in
Brazilian studies. Students must complete 15 credit hours of
approved courses with Brazilian content including LAS 2102
and Portuguese 2203. In addition, students must complete
three additional courses from the Areas of Study listed below:
one course in Area I, one course in Area II, and one course
in Area III. Proficiency at the level of intermediate Portuguese
can be demonstrated through testing. If this option is exercised,
students must take 3 credit hours of course work approved by
the director of undergraduate studies in lieu of the 3 credit hours
of PORT 2203.
Course selection must be approved by the director of
undergraduate studies for Latin American Studies. Other elective courses, including special topics courses, may be counted
toward the minor with the approval of the director of undergraduate studies.
Requirements for completion of the minor include at least 15
credit hours as follows:
1. 3 credit hours of LAS 2102: Introduction to Brazil
2. 3 credit hours of PORT 2203: Intermediate Portuguese
(PORT 1103 is a prerequisite)
3. 3 credit hours from Area I: Portuguese Language and
Literature
4. 3 credit hours from Area II: Brazilian Society, History, and
Cultures

ANTHROPOLOGY: 2108, Indigenous Peoples of Lowland South America.
HISTORY: 2490, Brazilian Civilization.
PORTUGUESE: 3302, Brazilian Pop Culture; 4350, Brazilian Culture
through Native Material; 3891, Special Topics in Portuguese and Brazilian
Literature or Civilization in English Translation.
Area of Study III: Brazil in Regional and Global Context
AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 2148, Blacks in Latin
America and the Caribbean; 3248, Atlantic African Slave Trade; 1706,
Capoeira: Afro-Brazilian Race, Culture, and Expression.
ANTHROPOLOGY: 2106, Culture and Power in Latin America.
ECONOMICS: 2220, Latin American Development.
HISTORY: 1370, Colonial Latin America; 1380, Modern Latin America;
2450, Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America, 1700–1820;
2510, Reform and Revolution in Latin America; 2540, Race and Nation in
Latin America.
POLITICAL SCIENCE: 3217, Latin American Politics; 3228, International
Politics of Latin America.
SOCIOLOGY: 3231, Contemporary Latin America.
Course descriptions begin on page 190.

Latino and Latina Studies
DIRECTOR William Luis
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR Lorraine López
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR Gretchen Selcke
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Candice Amich (English), Marzia Milazzo
(English)

Latino and Latina Studies focuses on cultural production and
political and socioeconomic experiences of people inculcated
with the U.S. experience, self-identifying as Latinos and Latinas
and communicating primarily in English and sometimes in
Spanish. The LATS major and minor will examine this enduring and dynamic population that crosses and re-crosses borders
constructed by geography, linguistics, class, race, and gender.
This program of study is designed to accommodate a range of
voices and multiple manifestations of Latino and Latina identity
and cultural expression in historical and contemporary contexts to fill in this vital but often overlooked component of our
national identity and discourse.
Students pursuing a LATS major or minor are expected to
obtain language competence in Spanish before completing the
program, though they do not need to meet this requirement
when declaring the major or minor. Students may satisfy this

A&S

114

vanderbilt university

requirement by completing SPAN 3303, or any other course
with a higher number taught in Spanish.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

SPANISH: 3302, Spanish for Oral Communication Through Cultural Topics; 3303, Introduction to Spanish and Spanish American Literature; 3345,
Spanish for Business and Economics; 3830, Spanish for the Medical Profession; 4310, The Contemporary Novel; 3835, Latino Immigration Experience; 4750, Afro-Hispanic Literature; 4755, Latina and Latin American
Women Writers.

Program of Concentration in Latino and Latina Studies

Category B: Historical Context

The interdisciplinary major in Latino and Latina studies consists of thirty-six (36) credit hours. The specific requirements
are as follows:
1. LATS 2201, Introduction to Latino and Latina Studies
(3 credit hours)
2. SPAN 3303, Introduction to Spanish and Spanish American
Literature (3 credit hours)
SPAN 3303 requires up to 19 prerequisite credit hours of
Spanish language instruction through SPAN 3302, depending
on departmental placement.
3. ENGL 3658, Latino-American Literature (3 credit hours)
4. LATS 4961, Latino and Latina Studies Seminar, which is
usually taken in the senior year (3 credit hours)
5. Eight elective courses (24 credit hours) with at least two
courses from Group A (Latino and Latina Culture) and two
courses from Group B (Historical Context), that have not
already been applied to satisfy above requirements.

Minor in Latino and Latina Studies
Students pursuing the interdisciplinary minor must complete
eighteen (18) credit hours. The specific requirements are as
follows:
1. LATS 2201, Introduction to Latino and Latina Studies
(3 credit hours)
2. SPAN 3303 or ENGL 3658 (3 credit hours)
If both courses are taken, only one may be applied as elective
credit.

AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 3178, Colonialism and
After.
ANTHROPOLOGY: 2106, Culture and Power in Latin America; 2220/2220W,
Human Landscapes; 3160, Anthropologies and Archaeologies of Community; 3161, Colonial Encounters in the Americas; 3202, The Collapse of
Civilizations; 3240, Ancient Mesoamerican Civilizations; 3241, The Aztecs;
3242, The Archaeology of the Ancient Maya Civilization; 3243, Classic Maya
Religion and Politics; 3250, The Inca Empire.
ENGLISH: 3674, Caribbean Literature.
HISTORY: 1380, Modern Latin America; 1383, Slave Resistance in the
Americas; 1385W, Disease and Disorder in the Atlantic World; 2450, Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America, 1700–1820; 2457, Drug
Trafficking and Society in Latin America; 2480, Central America; 2510,
Reform and Revolution in Latin America; 2570, Caribbean History, 1492–
1983; 2580, American Indian History before 1850; 2590, American Indian
History since 1850.
LATIN AMERICAN STUDIES: 2101, Introduction to Latin America; 4550,
Gender, Sexuality, and Family in Latin America.
MUSIC LITERATURE: 2110, Music in Latin America and the Caribbean.
SOCIOLOGY: 3231, Contemporary Latin America; 3602, Change and Social Movements in the Sixties.
SPANISH: 3365, Film and Recent Cultural Trends in Spain; 3892, Special Topics in Spanish Language and Linguistics; 4450, The Contemporary
Novel; 4465, The Theory and Practice of Drama; 4740, Spanish-American
Literature of the Boom Era; 4760, Literature and Medicine.

Category C: Critical Perspectives
AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 1010, Introduction to
African American and Diaspora Studies.

3. LATS 4961, Latino and Latina Studies Seminar (3 credit
hours)

ANTHROPOLOGY: 3134, Human Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

4. Three other courses (9 credit hours), with at least one
course from Group A (Latino and Latina Culture) and one
course from Group B (Historical Context), that have not
already been applied to satisfy above requirements.

POLITICAL SCIENCE: 2208, Law, Politics, and Justice; 2219, Politics of
Mexico; 3217, Latin American Politics; 3228, International Politics of Latin
America; 3264W, Global Feminisms.

Approved List of Courses

SOCIOLOGY: 3312, Environment and Development; 3232, Contemporary
Mexican Society; 3314, Environmental Inequality and Justice; 3612, Class,
Status, and Power; 3701, Racial Domination, Racial Progress; 3704, Race,
Gender, and Sport.

Category A: Latino and Latina Culture
ENGLISH: 1111-19 FYWS, Growing Up Latino and Latina; 3658, LatinoAmerican Literature.
HISTORY: 2725, Race, Power, and Modernity.
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT: 2510, Health Service
Delivery to Diverse Populations.
Latino and Latina Studies: 3831, Latino and Latina Business and
Entrepreneurship; 3850, Independent Study.
SOCIOLOGY: 3702, Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the United States; 3322,
Immigration in America.

PHILOSOPHY: 3617, Philosophy of Language.

WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1150/1150W, Sex and Gender in Everyday Life; 3201, Women and Gender in Transnational Context.
Course descriptions begin on page 190.

College of Arts and Science / Mathematics

Managerial Studies
DIRECTOR Gary R. Kimball
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR Joseph J. Rando
ADJUNCT PROFESSORS Corey M. Cleek, David H. Furse, Stuart A.
Garber, David H. Stacey
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Gary R. Kimball,
Michael K. Lawson, Patrick R. Leddin, Joseph J. Rando, Garnett H.
Slatton, Brent E. Trentham
ADJUNCT ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Janet M. McDonald
LECTURERS Douglas D. Edwards, Joseph H. Estes, Willis J. Hulings,
Gary C. McClure, Kerry Oliver, Suzanne M. Reed, Kevon Saber

THE College of Arts and Science offers two minors in the
liberal arts tradition to help students understand management functions, corporate strategy, and financial economics.
These two minors are administered by the Managerial Studies
program. Each of the minors has a distinct focus with basis
in economics and accounting. Due to an institutional review
of the university’s undergraduate course offerings in business,
first-year students entering in the fall of 2016 or later may not
declare the minors in Managerial Studies.
The program is directed by Professor Gary R. Kimball, 215
Calhoun Hall, (615) 322-4021.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Minor in Managerial Studies: Corporate Strategy
The minor in corporate strategy requires 18 credit hours.
The following courses are required:
FNEC 1600 Financial Accounting
MGRL 1100 Fundamentals of Management
MGRL 3250 Corporate Strategy
Three elective courses to be chosen from:
MGRL 1200 Principles of Marketing
MGRL 2300 Entrepreneurship: The Business Planning
Process
MGRL 3105 Negotiation
MGRL 3110 Business Management
MGRL 3200 Advanced Marketing
MGRL 3209 Creative Advertising
MGRL 3300 Entrepreneurial Challenge
FNEC 2600 Managerial Accounting
FNEC 2700 Corporate Finance
FNEC 3705 Financial Management

Minor in Managerial Studies: Financial Economics
The minor in financial economics requires 18 credit hours.
The following courses are required:
ECON 1500 Economic Statistics
or 1510 Intensive Economic Statistics
FNEC 1600 Financial Accounting
FNEC 2700 Corporate Finance
Three elective courses to be chosen from:
FNEC 2600 Managerial Accounting
FNEC 3700 Investment Analysis
FNEC 3705 Financial Management

115

FNEC 3710 Corporate Valuation
ECON 2300 Money and Banking
ECON 3300 Financial Instruments and Markets
Mathematics 2820, Psychology 2100, or Psychology 2110
(Peabody College) may substitute for Economics 1500. Economics majors must complete 15 hours of credit in FNEC
courses to complete the financial economics minor.
Minors may be combined with any departmental or interdisciplinary major; however, the minor in managerial studies
must include 15 credit hours that are being counted solely
toward the minor.
Students electing a second minor in managerial studies
must complete at least 12 credit hours counted solely toward
the second minor.

Financial Economics
Course descriptions begin on page 169.

Managerial Studies
Course descriptions begin on page 190.

Mathematics
CHAIR Mike Neamtu
VICE CHAIR John Ratcliffe
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES John Rafter
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Denis Osin
PROFESSORS EMERITI Philip S. Crooke, Richard R. Goldberg, Matthew
Gould, Robert L. Hemminger, Ettore F. Infante, Richard J. Larsen,
Michael D. Plummer, Eric Schechter, Horace E. Williams, Daoxing Xia
PROFESSORS John F. Ahner, Akram Aldroubi, Dietmar Bisch,
Emmanuele DiBenedetto, Paul H. Edelman, Mark N. Ellingham,
Douglas P. Hardin, C. Bruce Hughes, Vaughan F. R. Jones, Gennadi
Kasparov, Ralph N. McKenzie, Michael L. Mihalik, Mike Neamtu,
Alexander Olshanskiy, Denis Osin, John G. Ratcliffe, Edward B. Saff,
Mark V. Sapir, Larry L. Schumaker, Gieri Simonett, Constantine
Tsinakis, Glenn F. Webb, Dechao Zheng
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Jesse Peterson, Alexander Powell, Ioana
Suvaina, Steven T. Tschantz
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Valeriano Aiello, Scott Atkinson, Anna
Marie Bohmann, Jonathan Campbell, Cheng Chu, Marcelo Disconzi,
Spencer Dowdall, Gili Golan, Keaton Hamm, Matthew Haulmark,
Woden Kusner, Chenyun Luo, Giusy Mazzone, Robert McRae,
Andrew Moorhead, Rares Rasdeaconu, Rudy Rodsphon, Songling
Shan, Caglar Uyanik,Grace Work, Yixiang Wu
SENIOR LECTURER EMERITA Jo Ann W. Staples
SENIOR LECTURERS Derek Bruff, Linda Hutchison, Pamela Pigg, John
Rafter, Lori Rafter, Jakayla Robbins

THE Department of Mathematics offers an undergraduate
major with a high degree of flexibility. A solid background in
mathematics provides an excellent foundation for any quantitative discipline as well as many professions—many students
go on to professional studies in law, medicine, or business.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

A&S

116

Program of Concentration in Mathematics
Three tracks are available.
Program I (Standard Track) is intended for most mathematics majors in the College of Arts and Science, Blair School
of Music, and Peabody College.
Program II (Applied Track) is intended for students in the
School of Engineering who elect a second major in mathematics, but is also available for other students.
Program III (Honors Track) is intended for highly qualified students who either are preparing for graduate studies in
mathematics or plan to graduate with departmental honors.
Students who complete this program and, in addition, complete a senior thesis will graduate with departmental honors.
Requirements for the three tracks are summarized below.
Program I (Standard Track).
At least 32 credit hours in mathematics including at least 15
credit hours taken at Vanderbilt, as follows.
1. A calculus sequence: 1300–1301-2300 or
1300–1301–2500–2501.
2. Linear algebra and differential equations: 2600 or
2500–2501, and 2610.
3. At least 15 additional credit hours from 2800 or above.
4. The remainder of the credit hours must be chosen from
2800 or above.
Program II (Applied Track).
At least 29 credit hours in mathematics including at least
15 credit hours taken at Vanderbilt and 6 credit hours
outside the department, as follows.
1. A calculus sequence as in Program I.
2. Linear algebra and differential equations—one of the
following:
(a) one of 2410, 2600, or 2500–2501, and one of 2420 or
2610; or
(b) 2400 and either 2600 or 2500–2501.
3. At least 12 additional credit hours from 2800 or above,
excluding 3000.
4. The remainder of the credit hours in mathematics must
be chosen from 2800 or above.
5. At least 6 credit hours of advanced, mathematically
based science or engineering courses approved by the
director of undergraduate studies. This requirement is
automatically fulfilled by students who complete a physics major or a major in the School of Engineering.
Program III (Honors Track).
At least 38 credit hours in mathematics including at least 15
credit hours taken at Vanderbilt, as follows.
1. A calculus sequence as in Program I.
2. Linear algebra and differential equations as in Program I.
3. At least 21 additional credit hours of advanced course
work,
(a) including four courses taken from the following
three categories, at least one from each category:
		 1) Algebra: 3300, 4300, 4301.
		 2) Analysis: 3100, 3110, 6100, 6101.
		 3) Topology and Geometry: 3200, 3230, 4200, 4201,
		
4220, 6210.
(b) The remainder of the 21 credit hours must be chosen
from 2800 or above, excluding 4999.
4. The remainder of the credit hours must be chosen from
2800 or above.

vanderbilt university

Students who complete Program III and, in addition, fulfill
the Honors requirements listed below, will graduate with
departmental honors.
Students planning to teach in secondary school should
contact the director of secondary education programs in the
Department of Teaching and Learning at Peabody College for
course recommendations.

Honors Program
The Honors Program in Mathematics is designed to afford
superior students the opportunity to pursue more intensive
work within their major field. The program requires:
1. Completion of all the requirements of Program III
(Honors Track).
2. Graduate with a minimum grade point average of 3.6 in
courses that count toward the mathematics major.
3. Completion of a senior thesis in Math 4999 (3 credit
hours) in the second semester of the senior year. With
approval of the director of undergraduate studies, the
thesis may be based on research initiated or completed
at another academic institution, such as during an
NSF-sponsored REU program.
4. Oral examination on the senior thesis. A committee
of at least three faculty members—at least two from
the Department of Mathematics, one being the thesis
adviser—shall evaluate the thesis and the oral examination. Exceptional achievement on the thesis will earn
highest honors.
Interested students may apply to the director of undergraduate studies for admission to the Honors Program in their
junior year or the first semester of their senior year. Applicants
must meet college requirements for entry to the Honors
Program, and must maintain a minimum grade point average
of 3.6 in courses that count toward the mathematics major.
The application includes a one- to two-page proposal of the
planned thesis and the signature of the faculty member who
will be the thesis adviser.
The thesis must be submitted no later than two weeks
before the end of classes in the semester of graduation. The
oral examination will take place by the last day of classes in the
semester of graduation. Highest honors will be awarded for a
thesis that contains original high-quality research results in
combination with an oral defense at the highest quality level.
Students may sign up for Math 4999 during one semester of
their senior year. Math 4999 will not count toward the 21 credit
hours requirement in Program III.
Please consult the director of undergraduate studies for
details.

Minor in Mathematics
The minor in mathematics requires at least 15 credit hours in
mathematics, including:
1. Completion of a calculus sequence: 2300 or 2500–2501.
2. Linear algebra and differential equations: as in the
Program II major.
3. At least 6 credit hours not used to satisfy item 2 from
2800 or above.
Completion of a single-variable calculus sequence (1200–
1201–2200 or 1300–1301) is a prerequisite for the minor, but
does not count toward the credit hours of the minor.

College of Arts and Science / Medicine, Health, and Society

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure at the secondary level in
mathematics should refer to the chapter on Licensure for
Teaching in the Peabody College section of this catalog.

Calculus
Several calculus sequences are available:
1100; 1200–1201; 1300–1301–2300.
The courses in these sequences cover similar material, but at
different rates, and therefore overlap in content and credit. Students should not switch from one to another without approval
of the department. Such switching may result in loss of credit.
Students intending to take mathematics classes beyond one
year of calculus are advised to enroll in the 1300–1301–2300
sequence.
First-year students with test scores of 5 on the Calculus BC
advanced placement examination, thereby earning AP credit
for 1300–1301, may choose to enroll in the 2500–2501 sequence.
The combination of 2500–2501 is a blend of multivariable calculus and linear algebra, with an emphasis on rigorous proofs.

Duplicate Credit Policies
Deduction of credit caused by duplication proceeds as follows.
Students who earned math credit
1. through Advanced Placement/International Baccalaureate in one sequence and complete a course at Vanderbilt
from another sequence that duplicates this credit will
lose credit from the Advanced Placement/International
Baccalaureate earnings.
2. by transfer in one sequence and complete a course at
Vanderbilt from another sequence that duplicates this
credit will lose credit from the Vanderbilt course.
3. at Vanderbilt in one sequence and complete a course at
Vanderbilt from another sequence that duplicates this
credit will lose credit from the second Vanderbilt course.
Course descriptions begin on page 191.

Medicine, Health, and Society
DIRECTOR Jonathan M. Metzl
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR JuLeigh Petty
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Dominique Béhague
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES JuLeigh Petty
DIRECTOR OF ADVISING Courtney S. Muse
DIRECTOR OF EVALUATION JuLeigh Petty
PROFESSORS Jonathan M. Metzl, Hector Myers
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS David Aronoff (Medicine), Dominique Béhague,
Derek Griffith, Martha W. Jones, Cindy Kam (Political Science), Lijun
Song, Laura Stark
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Aimi Hamraie, Kenneth MacLeish, Tara McKay
SENIOR LECTURERS Celina Callahan-Kapoor, Odie Lindsey, Gabriel
Mendes, Courtney S. Muse, JuLeigh Petty
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Kathryn Anderson (Economics), Victor Anderson (Christian
Ethics), Gregory Barz (Ethnomusicology), Michael Bess (History),
James Blumstein (Health Law and Policy), Frank Boehm (Obstetrics
and Gynecology), Peter Buerhaus (Nursing), Christopher Carpenter
(Economics), Larry Churchill (Medicine), Ellen Clayton (Pediatrics

117
and Law), Jay Clayton (English), Bruce Compas (Psychology and
Human Development), Katherine Crawford (History), Kate Daniels
(English), Richard D’Aquila (Infectious Diseases), Dennis Dickerson
(History), Volney Gay (Religious Studies), Lenn Goodman (Philosophy),
Douglas Heimburger (Medicine), Joni Hersch (Law and Economics),
David Hess (Sociology), Kathleen Hoover-Dempsey (Psychology and
Human Development), Carl Johnson (Biological Sciences), John Lachs
(Philosophy), Jane Landers (History), Jana Lauderdale (Nursing), Pat
Levitt (Pharmacology), Leah Marcus (English), Terry A. Maroney (Law),
Richard McCarty (Psychology), Timothy McNamara (Psychology),
Velma McBride Murry (Human and Organizational Development),
Linda Norman (Nursing), Russell Rothman (Medicine), Sharon Shields
(Human and Organizational Development), John Tarpley (Surgery),
Benigno Trigo (Spanish), Arleen Tuchman (History), Holly Tucker
(French), Bart Victor (Organization Studies), Kip Viscusi (Law and
Economics), Lynn Walker (Pediatrics and Psychology and Human
Development), Kenneth Wallston (Nursing and Psychology), David W.
Wright (Chemistry), Laurence Zwiebel (Biological Sciences)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Mark Bliton (Medicine), Laura Carpenter
(Sociology), André Christie-Mizell (Sociology), Beth Conklin
(Anthropology), Julián F. Hillyer (Biological Sciences), Sarah Igo
(History), Rolanda Johnson (Nursing), Melanie Lutenbacher (Nursing),
Ifeoma Nwankwo (English), Evelyn Patterson (Sociology), Scott
Pearson (Surgery), Matthew Ramsey (History), Ruth Rogaski
(History), Norbert Ross (Anthropology), David Schlundt (Psychology),
Tiffiny Tung (Anthropology), Timothy J. Vogus (Management and
Organization Studies)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Carolyn Audet (Preventive Medicine), Joseph
B. Fanning (Medicine), Ebony McGee (Education), Michele Salisbury
(Nursing), Kevin T. Seale (Biomedical Engineering)
SENIOR LECTURERS Lorraine Catanzaro (Spanish), Clive Mentzel
(Political Science), Elisabeth H. Sandberg (Psychology)

THE Program in Medicine, Health, and Society offers an
interdisciplinary major (36 credit hours) and minor (18 credit
hours) for students interested in studying health-related beliefs
and practices in their social and cultural contexts. As part of the
requirements of the major, students must declare and complete
12 credit hours in one of the six concentrations in Medicine,
Health, and Society: global health; health behaviors and health
sciences; health economics and policy; inequality, intersectionality, and health justice; medicine, humanities, and arts; or critical
health studies. An honors program is available. MHS draws
on a variety of fields in the social sciences and humanities—
anthropology, economics, history, literature, philosophy/ethics,
psychology, sociology, and religious studies. The major will be of
particular interest to students preparing for careers in healthrelated professions as well as to students interested in examining
an important part of human experience from multiple perspectives and developing a critical understanding of contemporary
society. Students are encouraged to take advantage of the
opportunities offered by the Center for Medicine, Health, and
Society. Visit vanderbilt.edu/mhs for more details.
The program is directed by Jonathan M. Metzl, Frederick B.
Rentschler II Professor of Sociology and Medicine, Health, and
Society.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Medicine, Health, and Society
The major requires a minimum of 36 credit hours of course
work, distributed as follows:
Note: No more than 21 credit hours may be in courses designated MHS. Other than MHS, no more than 12 credit hours

A&S

118

may be in the same subject area; A&S Psychology and Peabody
Psychology are considered the same subject area for purposes of
the major/minor.
1. Core Courses — Students must complete one of the following (3 credit hours):
ANTH 2342, Biology of Inequality
MHS 1920, Politics of Health
MHS 1930, Social Dimensions of Health and Illness
MHS 1940, Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities
MHS 1950, Theories of the Body
MHS 2110, American Medicine in the World
MHS 2230, Masculinity and Men’s Health
2. Concentration — Students must complete four courses
not used to satisfy the core course requirement or the elective requirements in one of the following six concentrations
(12 credit hours). Students must declare one of the following
concentrations when they declare the major.
Note: Courses must be from at least two subject areas.
A. Global health
B. Health policies and economies
C. Health behaviors and health sciences
D. Inequality, intersectionality, and health justice
E. Medicine, humanities, and arts
F. Critical health studies
See below for a list of courses that count for Concentrations
A, B, C, D, and E. Students choosing concentration F must propose a set of four courses (12 credit hours) that form a coherent
program of study related to critical health studies and receive
approval from the director of undergraduate studies.
3. Electives — Seven courses not used to satisfy the core
course or concentration requirements chosen from the list of
approved courses (21 credit hours).
4. Disciplinary Requirement — At least 3 credit hours from
the following courses must be used to satisfy the concentration
requirement or electives requirement.
ANTH 3143, Medical Anthropology
ANTH 3141, Anthropology of Healing
ECON 2350, Health Care Policy
ECON 3350, Economics of Health
HIST 2800, Modern Medicine
MHS 3050W, Medicine and Literature
PHIL 1008, 1008W, Introduction to Medical Ethics
PHIL 3608, Ethics and Medicine
PSCI 3268, American Health Policy
PSY 3635, Health Psychology
SOC 3301, Society and Medicine
SOC 3304, Race, Gender, and Health
WGS 2240, Introduction to Women’s Health
In order to graduate with a major in MHS, students must
take a written exam in the second semester of their senior year.
(Students who are away during the second semester of their
senior year because they are studying abroad or graduating early
should schedule the exam during the first semester.) The exam is
not graded and no grade will appear on the student’s transcript.
The purpose of the exam is to ascertain the extent to which MHS
majors demonstrate knowledge of the MHS curriculum.

vanderbilt university

Honors Program
The Honors Program in Medicine, Health, and Society offers
superior students a more intensive concentration within their
major field. Admission to the program requires:
1. A 3.3 cumulative grade point average.
2. A 3.3 cumulative grade point average in courses that count
toward the Medicine, Health, and Society major.
3. An application that (a) describes the proposed topic; (b)
identifies the faculty member who will serve as the thesis
adviser; and (c) includes a letter of recommendation from
the proposed thesis adviser.
Completion of the program requires:
1. Two semesters, 3 credit hours each semester of the senior
year in MHS 4998/4999.
2. An honors thesis of approximately fifty pages that reveals
an interdisciplinary perspective, submitted no later than
two weeks before the end of classes in the second semester
of the senior year, and approved by a committee of at least
two faculty members (one of whom must be affiliated with
Medicine, Health, and Society).
3. Successful completion of an oral examination focusing on
the topic of the thesis.

Minor in Medicine, Health, and Society
The minor consists of a minimum of 18 credit hours of course
work, distributed as follows:
Note: No more than 9 credit hours may be in the same
subject area; A&S Psychology and Peabody Psychology are
considered the same subject area for purposes of the major/
minor.
1. Core Courses — Students must complete one of the
core courses of the major (3 credit hours).
2. Concentration — Students must complete three courses
in one of the following five concentrations (9 credit hours).
Students must declare one of the following concentrations
when they declare the minor.
A. Global health
B. Health policies and economies
C. Health behaviors and health sciences
D. Inequality, intersectionality, and health justice
E. Medicine, humanities, and arts
3. Electives — Two additional courses, excluding those
with an asterisk, chosen from the list of approved courses.
(6 credit hours)
4. Disciplinary Requirement — At least 3 credit hours
from the following courses must be used to satisfy the concentration requirement or electives requirement.
ANTH 3143, Medical Anthropology
ANTH 3141, Anthropology of Healing
ECON 2350, Health Care Policy
ECON 3350, Economics of Health
HIST 2800, Modern Medicine
MHS 3050W, Medicine and Literature
PHIL 1008, 1008W, Introduction to Medical Ethics
PHIL 3608, Ethics and Medicine
PSCI 3268, American Health Policy
PSY 3635, Health Psychology
SOC 3301, Society and Medicine

College of Arts and Science / Medicine, Health, and Society

SOC 3304, Race, Gender, and Health
WGS 2240, Introduction to Women’s Health

119

Approved Courses

MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 1920, Politics of Health; 2120, Health
Social Movements; 2250, Autism in Context; 2320, Medicine, Law, and Society; 2420, Economic Demography and Global Health; 2920, Medicine on
Trial; 3000, Undergraduate Seminar (as appropriate); 3320, Introduction to
U.S. Health Care Policy; 3890, Special Topics (as appropriate).

(Please consult the director of undergraduate studies for
approval of “as appropriate” courses in concentration areas.)

PHILOSOPHY: 1008, 1008W, Introduction to Medical Ethics; 1111, FirstYear Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3608, Ethics and Medicine.

CONCENTRATION A: Global Health
AMERICAN STUDIES: 3200, Global Perspectives on the U.S.
ANTHROPOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate);
3143, Medical Anthropology.
ASIAN STUDIES: 2630, Chinese Medicine.
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3965, Undergraduate Seminar (as appropriate).
FRENCH: 3112, Medical French in Intercultural Contexts.
HISTORY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 2160, Medicine in Islam.
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (PEABODY): 3200,
Global Dimensions of Community Development; 3231, Introduction to
Health Services.
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES: 3831, Global Citizenship and Service;
3832, Global Community Service; 3833, Seminar in Global Citizenship
and Service (as appropriate).
MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 2110, American Medicine and the
World; 2310, Chinese Society and Medicine; 2410, HIV/AIDS in the Global
Community; 2420, Economic Demography and Global Health; 2610, Global Health Crises; 2940, Race, Citizenship, and Health; 3000, Undergraduate Seminar (as appropriate); 3010, Perspectives on Global Public Health;
3110, Global Health and Social Justice; 3310, Healthcare in France and
the U.S.; 3890, Special Topics (as appropriate); 4010, Psychiatry, Culture,
and Globalization.
POLITICAL SCIENCE: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate);
2215, Change in Developing Countries; 2236, The Politics of Global Inequality; 3893, Selected Topics in American Government (as appropriate);
3894, Selected Topics in Comparative Politics (as appropriate).
SOCIOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3314, Environmental Inequality and Justice; 3321, Population and Society.
SPANISH: 3830, Spanish for the Medical Profession; 4760, Literature and
Medicine.
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as
appropriate); 2267, Seminar on Gender and Violence; 3201, Women and
Gender in Transnational Context.
CONCENTRATION B: Health Policies and Economies
ANTHROPOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate);
2109, Food Politics in America; 3144, Politics of Reproductive Health;
3890, Special Topics (as appropriate).
ECONOMICS: 1010, Principles of Macroeconomics; 1020, Principles of
Microeconomics; 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 1500,
Economic Statistics; 1510, Intensive Economic Statistics; 2350, Health
Care Policy; 3050, Introduction to Econometrics; 3350, Economics of
Health.
HISTORY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 2800, Modern Medicine.
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (PEABODY): 3231, Introduction to Health Services; 3241, Introduction to Health Policy; 3331,
Managing Health Care Organizations; 3205, Policy Analysis Methods.

POLITICAL SCIENCE: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate);
2236, The Politics of Global Inequality; 2270, Conducting Political Research; 3268, American Health Policy; 3893, Selected Topics in American
Government (as appropriate); 3894, Selected Topics in Comparative Politics (as appropriate).
SOCIOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3302,
Poverty, Health, and Politics; 3314, Environmental Inequality and Justice;
4961, Seminars in Selected Topics (as appropriate).
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as
appropriate).
UNIVERSITY: 3325, Health Policy Analysis and Advocacy.
CONCENTRATION C: Health Behavior and Health Sciences
ANTHROPOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 2227,
Food in the Ancient World; 3344, Genetic Anthropology Lab Techniques;
3890, Special Topics (as appropriate); 4345, Human Evolutionary Genetics.
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES: 1105, Human Biology; 1111, First-Year Writing
Seminar (as appropriate); 3243 Genetics of Disease; 3245, Biology of Cancer; 3254, Neurobiology of Behavior; 3270, Statistical Methods in Biology;
3965, Undergraduate Seminar (as appropriate).
BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING: 3200, Analysis of Biomedical Data.
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (PEABODY): 3221,
Health Service Delivery to Diverse Populations; 3311, Introduction to
Health Promotion.
MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 1930, Social Dimensions of Health
and Illness; 1940, Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities; 2120, Health Social Movements; 2330, Men’s Health Research and Policy; 2430, Social
Capital and Health; 2950, Healing Animals; 3000, Undergraduate Seminar
(as appropriate); 3030, Community Health Research; 3450, Mental Illness
Narratives; 3890, Special Topics (as appropriate).
NEUROSCIENCE: 2201, Neuroscience; 3235, Biological Basis of Mental
Disorders.
PSYCHOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 1200,
General Psychology; 2100, Quantitative Methods; 2150, Principles of
Experimental Design; 3100, Abnormal Psychology; 3620, Schizophrenia;
3625, Depression; 3635, Health Psychology; 3705, Human Sexuality;
3750, Perception; 3760, Mind and Brain; 3785, Brain Damage and Cognition; PSY-PC-1250, Developmental Psychology; PSY-PC 2102, Statistical
Analysis; PSY-PC 2110, Introduction to Statistical Analysis; PSY-PC-2250,
Cognitive Aspects of Human Development; PSY-PC-2300, PSY-PC- Social and Emotional Context of Cognition; PSY-PC-2550, Adolescent Development; PSY-PC-3650, Advanced Topical Seminar (approval dependent
upon topic).
SOCIOLOGY: 1010, 1010W, Introduction to Sociology; 1020, 1020W,
Contemporary Social Issues; 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 2100, Statistics for Social Scientists; 3002, Introduction to Social
Research; 3003, Research Practicum; 3301, Society and Medicine; 3303,
Social Dynamics of Mental Health; 4961, Seminars in Selected Topics (as
appropriate). *Only one of SOC 1010 or 1020 may be counted towards the
major or minor.
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as
appropriate); 2240, Introduction to Women’s Health.

A&S

120
CONCENTRATION D: Inequality, Intersectionality, and Health
Justice
AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 1016, Race Matters;
1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3214, Black Masculinity:
Social Imagery and Public Policy.
ANTHROPOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 2342,
Biology of Inequality; 3120, Sociocultural Field Methods (as appropriate);
3144, Politics of Reproductive Health; 3343, Biology and Culture of Race;
3890, Special Topics (as appropriate); 4345, Human Evolutionary Genetics.
HISTORY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3040, Health
and the African American Experience.
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (PEABODY): 3221,
Health Service Delivery to Diverse Populations.
MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 1940, Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities; 2230, Masculinity and Men’s Health; 2240, Bionic Bodies, Disability
Cultures; 2330, Men’s Health Research and Policy; 2940, Race, Citizenship,
and Health; 3000, Undergraduate Seminar (as appropriate); 3030, Community Health Research; 3040, Designing Healthy Publics; 3140, Afrofuturism
and Cultural Criticisms of Medicine; 3890, Special Topics (as appropriate).
SOCIOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3301, Society and Medicine; 3304, Race, Gender, and Health; 3321, Population
and Society; 3723, Gender, Sexuality, and the Body; 4961, Seminars in
Selected Topics (as appropriate).
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as
appropriate); 2268, Gender, Race, Justice, and the Environment.
CONCENTRATION E: Medicine, Humanities, and Arts
ANTHROPOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 2370,
Death and the Body; 3141, Anthropology of Healing; 3142, Medicine, Culture, and the Body; 3143, Medical Anthropology.
ASIAN STUDIES: 2630, Chinese Medicine.
ENGLISH: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3720, 3720W,
Literature, Science, and Technology (as appropriate); 3891, Special Topics
in Creative Writing (as appropriate).
HISTORY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 2160, Medicine in Islam; 2800, Modern Medicine; 2810, Women, Health, and Sexuality;
2835, Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition to 1700; 2840, Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition since 1700; 3040, Health and the
African American Experience.
HISTORY OF ART: 3140, Healing and Art in East Asia.
MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar:
Medicine, Health, and the Body; 2230, Masculinity and Men’s Health;
2250, War and the Body; 2350, Italian Representations of Wellness and
Illness; 2950, Healing Animals; 3000, Undergraduate Seminar (as appropriate); 3050W, Medicine and Literature; 3150, Death and Dying in America; 3250, Perspectives on Trauma; 3890, Special Topics (as appropriate);
4010, Psychiatry, Culture, and Globalization; 4050, Narrative and Medicine: Stories of Illness and the Doctor-Patient Relationship.
PHILOSOPHY: 1008, 1008W, Introduction to Medical Ethics; 1111, FirstYear Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3606, 3606W, Moral Problems; 3608,
Ethics and Medicine; 3630, Philosophy of Mind.
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 3941, Religion, Science, and Evolution: Psychology
of Religious Myth and Ritual.
SOCIOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate).
SPANISH: 4760, Literature and Medicine.
WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as
appropriate); 2267, Seminar on Gender and Violence; 2612, Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender Studies.

vanderbilt university
OTHER ELECTIVES

In addition to the electives listed below, any course from the
above concentration areas may serve as an elective if it is not
already being used to satisfy a concentration requirement. No
more than 12 hours of courses with an asterisk in the list below
may be used to satisfy the major. Courses with an asterisk may
not be used to satisfy the minor. (Please consult the director of
undergraduate studies for approval of “as appropriate” courses
for electives.)
ANTHROPOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate);
1301, Introduction to Biological Anthropology; 3372, Human Osteology;
4373, Health and Disease in Ancient Populations.
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES: *1510–1511, Introduction to Biological Sciences;
*2520, Biochemistry.
CHEMISTRY: *2221–2222, Organic Chemistry; *2211–2212, Organic
Chemistry for Advanced Placement Students.
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (PEABODY): 3342, Introduction to Community Psychology (same as PSY-PC); 3890, Health
Promotion Delivery.
MATHEMATICS: 1011, Probability and Statistical Inference; 2810, Probability and Statistics for Engineering; 2820, Introduction to Probability and
Mathematical Statistics.
MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 1001, Commons Seminar; 3831,
Service Learning Research and Readings (Note: 3831, Service Learning
Research and Readings, must be taken concurrently with 3830); 3850, Independent Study; 3881, Internship Readings and Research (Note: 3881,
Internship Readings and Research, must be taken concurrently with 3880).
NURSING: *1500, Introduction to Microbiology; *1601, Introduction to Nutrition; *1602, Nutrition and Health; *3101–3102, Anatomy and Physiology.
PHILOSOPHY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3606,
3606W, Moral Problems; 3630, Philosophy of Mind.
PSYCHOLOGY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (as appropriate); 3600,
Personality; 3610, Introduction to Clinical Psychology OR PSY-PC-3200,
Introduction to Clinical Psychology; 3615, Emotion; PSY-PC-1205, PSYPC-1207, Minds, Brains, Cultures, and Contexts; PSY-PC-2400, Social
and Personality Development; PSY-PC-2500, Infancy; PSY-PC-2550,
PSY-PC-3650, Advanced Topical Seminar (as appropriate).
SOCIOLOGY: 4961, Seminars in Selected Topics (as appropriate).
Course descriptions begin on page 194.

Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology
DIRECTORS Paul E. Laibinis, Sandra J. Rosenthal

FACULTY in the School of Engineering and the College of Arts
and Science offer an interdisciplinary minor in nanoscience
and nanotechnology. The minor is administered by the School
of Engineering in collaboration with the College of Arts and
Science.
Nanoscience and nanotechnology are based on the ability
to synthesize, organize, characterize, and manipulate matter
systematically at dimensions of ~1 to 100 nm, creating uniquely
functional materials that differ in properties from those
prepared by traditional approaches. At these length scales,

College of Arts and Science / Neuroscience

materials can take on new properties that can be exploited in
a wide range of applications such as for solar energy conversion, ultra-sensitive sensing, and new types of vaccines. These
activities require the integration of expertise from various
areas of science and engineering, often relying on methods of
synthesis, fabrication, and characterization that are beyond
those encountered in an individual course of study.
Students who minor in nanoscience and nanotechnology
learn the principles and methods used in this rapidly growing
field. Its core originates in the physical sciences by providing
key approaches for describing the behavior of matter on the
nanoscale. Synthetic approaches are used to manipulate matter
systematically, for creating uniquely functional nanomaterials that can be inorganic, organic, biological, or a hybrid of
these. With a third component of characterization, a process
for designing systems to have particular properties as a result of
their composition and nanoscale arrangement emerges. Students
are introduced to these areas through foundational and elective
courses for the minor that are specified below, the latter of which
can be selected to fulfill the degree requirements for their major.
The minor in nanoscience and nanotechnology is supported by
the Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering
(VINSE) that brings together faculty from the College of Arts
and Science, the School of Engineering, and the Medical Center.
A specialized laboratory facility maintained by VINSE provides
students in the minor with capstone experiences that allow them
to prepare and characterize a variety of nanostructured systems
using in-house state-of-the-art instrumentation. This hands-on
laboratory component enhances the attractiveness of students to
both employers and graduate schools.
Details of the minor requirements are provided in the
School of Engineering section of the catalog.

121

utilized in neuroscience research. Finally, the program allows
students to pursue more work in the specific sub-disciplines of
neuroscience and in areas of inquiry related to neuroscience
through elective courses. Students are especially encouraged to
participate in research in the laboratories of neuroscience faculty
under the auspices of the undergraduate research courses. More
extensive research experience is available through the Honors
Program in Neuroscience. For additional information, see
as.vanderbilt.edu/neuroscience.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration
The neuroscience major consists of 39 credit hours of course
work that includes 8 credit hours of organic chemistry and 31
credit hours of neuroscience and related courses distributed
among specific disciplines associated with the study of neuroscience. Students majoring in neuroscience are additionally
required to complete a core of introductory courses in mathematics, statistics or computer science, biology and physics
that provide the broad scientific background necessary to the
study of neuroscience. The areas and associated course options
are listed below. Excluding research credit (3861, 3862, 3863,
3864, and 4999), the neuroscience and related courses must be
drawn from at least two departments or programs. Students
seeking a second major within the College of Arts and Science
may count a maximum of 6 credit hours of 2000-or-higherlevel course work to meet the requirements of both majors.

Required Math and Science Courses

Neuroscience
DIRECTOR David H. Zald
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Elizabeth Catania
Steering Committee
PROFESSORS Douglas G. McMahon (Biological Sciences), Renè Marois
(Psychology)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Suzanna Herculano-Houzel (Psychology and
Biological Sciences)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Elizabeth Catania (Neuroscience), Alexander
Maier (Psychology)
SENIOR LECTURER Leslie M. Smith (Psychology)

The study of the nervous system is an interdisciplinary enterprise that draws upon a variety of scientific disciplines ranging from molecular biology and biophysics to computational
science and engineering to the study of behavior and cognition.
To meet the challenge of providing training for entry into this
exciting and growing field, Vanderbilt offers an interdisciplinary
program of concentration in neuroscience that utilizes expertise
from several departments within the university. The program
consists of three components. The first provides for a broad
foundation in the basic sciences and mathematics. Second, the
program provides for exposure to each of the general areas of
neuroscience including courses in cellular/molecular, systems,
and integrative/cognitive neuroscience. This course work is
supplemented with exposure to the laboratory techniques

Biological Sciences (8 credit hours)
BSCI 1510, 1511, 1510L, and either 1511L or 1512L.
Chemistry (8 credit hours)
CHEM 2211 or 2221; CHEM 2212 or 2222; and CHEM
2221L and 2222L.
Mathematics, Statistics, Computer Science (6–8 credit hours)
MATH 1100, 1200, or 1300; and one of MATH 1201, 1301,
BSCI 3270, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, CS 1101, 1103.
Physics (8 credit hours)
PHYS 1501, 1601 or 2051; PHYS 1502, 1602 or 2053; PHYS
1501L, 1601L or 2052; and PHYS 1502L, 1602L or 2054.

Neuroscience Courses
Introduction to Neuroscience (3 credit hours)
NSC 2201.
Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience (6 credit hours)
BSCI 3252, 3256; NSC 3235, 3240, 3245, 3260, 3269, 3891.
Systems, Integrative, and Cognitive Neuroscience (6 credit
hours)
BSCI 3230, 3254; NSC 3270, 3274, 3891, 4961, 4969; PSY
3120, 3620, 3630, 3700, 3750, 3760, 3765, 3775, 3780, 3785.
Neuroscience Laboratory (4 credit hours)
NSC 3861, 3862.
Neuroscience Electives (6 credit hours)
Two additional courses from the Cellular and Molecular
Neuroscience and/or Systems, Integrative, and Cognitive Neuroscience courses listed above. NSC 3863 or
NSC 4999 may be used to count for one elective course.

A&S

122

vanderbilt university

Philosophy

Related Course Electives
(6 credit hours; two courses not used to satisfy the
Required Math and Science course requirement above.)
BSCI 2201, 2201L, 2210, 2210L, 2520, 3270, 4265; BME
3100, 3101; CHEM 2100, 3310, 3710, 4720; CS 1101 or 1103;
MATH 2300, 2400 or 2420; PHIL 3616, 3630; PSY 2100,
3100, 3600, 3625, 3705, 3715.

Honors Program
Superior students with a strong interest in research are encouraged to consider the Honors Program in Neuroscience. Normally a student will apply to enter the Honors Program in the
second semester of the junior year and assemble an Honors
Committee that will consist of the research mentor and at least
two other appropriate members of the faculty. Entrance into
and satisfactory completion of the Honors Program requires
that students maintain a cumulative grade point average of 3.3
and a grade point average of 3.3 in courses counting toward the
neuroscience major. Honors candidates must meet all the normal requirements for the neuroscience major, but are expected
to complete at least 6 hours of advanced research course work
(from NSC 3863, 3864 and 4999). Three of these research-credit
hours may count toward neuroscience elective course work. As
part of this research course work, the candidate will be expected
to write an honors thesis, present the thesis during the final
semester in residence, and satisfactorily pass an oral examination by the student’s Honors Committee. Students interested in
becoming honors candidates should consult with the director of
honors. For more information on the Honors Program, please
see as.vanderbilt.edu/neuroscience/the-honors-program.

Minor in Neuroscience
This program provides a foundation of knowledge in neuroscience that is appropriate for students majoring in a related
discipline or who have a general interest in the nervous system.
As prerequisites, students are required to complete CHEM 1601
and 1601L, BSCI 1510 –1511, 1510L, and either 1511L or 1512L.
The minor program consists of 18 credit hours of course work
distributed as follows:
NSC 2201.
3 credit hours in Statistics/Computer Science:
BSCI 3270, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, CS 1101 or 1103.
6 credit hours chosen from the courses listed as
“Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience.”
6 credit hours chosen from the courses listed as
“Systems, Integrative and Cognitive Neuroscience.”
The chosen courses counting towards the 18 credit hours
must come from at least 3 different departments or
programs (e.g. NSC, PSY and BSCI).
Research courses (NSC 3860, 3861, 3862, 3863, 3864, and
4999) do not count towards the minor.
Course descriptions begin on page 197.

CHAIR Robert Talisse
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Scott Aikin
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Julian Wuerth
PROFESSORS EMERITI Clement Dore, Robert R. Ehman, Marilyn
Friedman, Larry May, John F. Post, Charles E. Scott, Donald W.
Sherburne, Henry A. Teloh
PROFESSORS Lenn E. Goodman, Michael P. Hodges, John Lachs,
Kelly Oliver, Lucius T. Outlaw Jr., Robert Talisse, David Wood
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Idit Dobbs-Weinstein, Jeffrey Tlumak,
Julian Wuerth
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Scott Aikin, Karen Ng
SENIOR LECTURERS Jonathan Bremer, Gary Jaeger

THE Department of Philosophy at Vanderbilt offers a wide
range of courses relating philosophy to various dimensions of
human concern. The department also emphasizes those philosophers and movements that have had significant, forming
effect in Western culture.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Philosophy
The program of concentration should be tailored to the needs
and interests of the student. The following distribution of
courses is required as part of the major. Logic: 1003 or 3003 (at
least 3 credit hours); Ethics: 1005, 3605, 3606, or 3606W (at least
3 credit hours); History of Philosophy: 2100, 2102, 2103, or 2104
(at least 6 credit hours). Any alterations must be approved by
the director of undergraduate studies. We encourage all majors
to work closely with their advisers to select courses that form a
coherent whole. The student must take at least 30 credit hours
in the major field of which at least 21 credit hours must be in
courses beyond the 1000 level.

Honors Program
The Honors Program offers opportunities for advanced study
in philosophy, including independent research projects and/
or enrollment in certain graduate seminars (with permission
of the instructor). To be admitted to the program, the student
must: (a) be a major in philosophy; (b) have a grade point
average of 3.3 in all courses; (c) have a 3.5 grade point average
in philosophy courses; and (d) develop a written proposal
for advanced study in consultation with a philosophy faculty
sponsor. Students who satisfy these requirements should meet
with the director of undergraduate studies to review their
programs, whereupon the director may nominate the students
for honors work. Honors work typically begins in the junior
year or in the first semester of the senior year; students in the
program must complete at least 3 credit hours of Philosophy
3999. Students who successfully complete the program while
maintaining the grade point averages of 3.3 generally, and 3.5 in
the major, will receive honors in philosophy; students who do
especially distinguished work will receive highest honors.

Minor in Philosophy
The minor in philosophy consists of 18 credit hours, including
at least 12 credit hours in courses beyond the 1000 level. The
minor program will be constructed so as to provide a broad

College of Arts and Science / Physics and Astronomy

123

grounding in philosophy and to complement the student’s
other studies. Each program must be approved by the director
of undergraduate studies.

NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Note: 1002 or 1002W or 1005 or 1111 are ordinarily taken prior
to all other philosophy courses, except 1003 and 3003 (logic
courses), 3616 (philosophy of science), and 3013 (aesthetics).

Program of Concentration in Physics

Course descriptions begin on page 198.

Physics and Astronomy
CHAIR M. Shane Hutson
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES David A. Weintraub
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Julia Velkovska
PROFESSORS EMERITI Royal G. Albridge, John Paul Barach, Charles
A. Brau, Leonard C. Feldman, Dennis Hall, Arnold M. Heiser, P. Galen
Lenhert, Charles F. Maguire, Volker E. Oberacker, C. E. Roos, Medford
S. Webster
PROFESSORS David J. Ernst, Daniel M. Fleetwood, John C. Gore, Senta
V. Greene, Richard F. Haglund Jr., Joseph H. Hamilton, M. Shane
Hutson, Will E. Johns, Thomas W. Kephart, Sokrates T. Pantelides,
James Patton, Akunuri V. Ramayya, Sandra J. Rosenthal, Robert J.
Scherrer, Paul D. Sheldon, Keivan G. Stassun, Norman H. Tolk, A.
Sait Umar, Kalman Varga, Julia Velkovska, Thomas J. Weiler, David A.
Weintraub, Sharon Weiss, Robert A. Weller, John P. Wikswo Jr.
DISTINGUISHED RESEARCH PROFESSOR C. Robert O’Dell
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Andreas Berlind, Steven E. Csorna, Kelly
Holley-Bockelmann, Hassane Mchaourab, Yaqiong Xu
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Daniel F. Gochberg, Alfredo Gurrola, William
R. Holmes, Erin Rericha, Marta Verweij
SENIOR LECTURERS Forrest Charnock, Sourish Dutta, Erika Grundstrom,
Momchil Velkovsky

AS fundamental sciences, physics and astronomy continue to
be driving intellectual forces in expanding our understanding of the universe, in discovering the scientific basis for new
technologies, and in applying these technologies to research. In
keeping with this crucial role, the Department of Physics and
Astronomy offers courses dealing with both the cultural and
intellectual aspects of the disciplines, a broadly based major
program flexible enough to serve as preparation for graduate
study in physics, applied physics, medical physics, astronomy
or astrophysics, professional study in another area, or technical employment, and minor programs for students desiring to
combine physics or astronomy with other majors. An honors
program is available for qualified departmental majors.
A distinguishing feature of the Vanderbilt undergraduate curriculum is the close coupling between teaching and
research. At Vanderbilt, active research groups are studying the
physics of elementary particles; nuclear structure and heavyion reactions; nonlinear interactions of lasers with materials at
ultrafast time scales; the behavior of electrons, atoms, molecules, and photons near surfaces; the electric and magnetic
properties of living systems; the structure and dynamics of
biopolymers; young stars; and cosmology. All professors are
engaged in research, and undergraduate students can participate in this research informally or through independent study
or summer work.
The Society of Physics Students arranges informal
discussions.

The departmental major provides a thorough grounding in
the core areas of physics. It is suitable either as preparation for
careers in science and engineering or as a springboard for applying technical knowledge in such fields as business, medicine, law,
public policy, and education. The major in the Department of
Physics and Astronomy consists of 31–32 credit hours of course
work, distributed as below. Students considering majoring in
physics are strongly encouraged to consult with the director of
undergraduate studies before registering for classes.
1. Core courses covering the major subdisciplines of physics —
Students must complete four of the following (12 credit
hours): Modern Physics and the Quantum World (2255);
Classical Mechanics (2275); Electricity, Magnetism, and Electrodynamics I (2290); Statistical Physics (3200); Quantum
Mechanics I (3651).
2. Laboratory work — Students may not use AP credit to
satisfy any portion of the laboratory sequence requirement
(3–4 credit hours):
a) Laboratory Principles I (1912L), Laboratory Principles
II (2255L), and Introduction to Experimental Research
(2953L); or
b) 1501L or 1601L, 1502L or 1602L, 2255L, and 2953L if the
student has entered the major by taking the introductory
physics course sequence 1501 or 1601, 1501L or 1601L, 1502 or
1602, and 1502L or 1602L. Students considering majoring in
physics who begin in 1501 or 1601 and 1501L or 1601L in the
fall semester are encouraged to take the combination 1502 +
1912L or 1602 + 1912L in the spring semester.
3. Electives (9 credit hours) — Pedagogical course work in
physics and/or astronomy; research hours (3850, 3851, 4998)
do not count toward this requirement. The course electives may be taken from any 2000-level or higher PHYS
or ASTR courses not used to satisfy any other requirement
of the major. Other courses may count as electives, such as
courses offered by the engineering school (or other departments and schools) that are particularly relevant, such as a
course in environmental studies, health physics, optics, or
materials science. Such exceptions must be approved by the
director of undergraduate studies.
4. Capstone (7 credit hours) — Computational Physics (3790),
3 credit hours of research (3850, 3851, or 4998) taken across
one or more semesters, and the Seminar in Presenting
Physics Research (3600). Physics-related research done in
other departments and programs, supervised by Vanderbilt
faculty and pre-approved by the director of undergraduate
studies, is also permitted in satisfaction of the research
requirement.
Immersion Experience: An enhanced version of the
Capstone Program, in which a student earns credit for 3851,
3852, or 4998 (but not 3850), and then completes an additional
semester of 3600, will enable a student majoring in physics to
complete their Immersion Experience within the disciplines of
either physics or astronomy.

A&S

124

Computer Science course work: All 2000-level and higher
PHYS courses assume students have working skills in programming. These skills may be learned outside of a regular course,
but should be equivalent to that taught in CS 1101 Programming
and Problem Solving. Students who do not already have these
skills are strongly advised to take this class in the first semester,
prior to beginning the three-semester laboratory sequence in the
second semester. In addition, the following Computer Science
and/or Scientific Computing courses are strongly recommended
for all physics majors: Program Design and Data Structures
(CS 2201) or Program Design and Data Structures for Scientific
Computing (CS 2204); Algorithms (CS 3250) or Scientific Computing Toolbox (SC 3250); and High Performance Computing
(SC 3260). Physics majors pursuing a second major or minor in
computer science should take CS 2201; physics majors pursuing
a minor in scientific computing should take CS 2204.
Mathematics course work: All physics majors are expected to
have high-level skills in mathematics in order to be successful in
PHYS classes and to prepare for graduate work. MATH courses
are not formally required for the major in physics; however,
most physics courses identify MATH prerequisite or corequisite courses in order to indicate the mathematical skill-level
assumed for that class. Multivariable calculus is a co-requisite
for 2255 and a prerequisite for all other 2000-level or higher
PHYS courses. Physics majors are expected to develop a working
knowledge of single-variable calculus, multivariable calculus,
and ordinary differential equations. The following courses are
those strongly recommended for physics majors:
1. Accelerated Calculus I (1300) and Accelerated Calculus II
(1301);
2. Multivariable Calculus (2300) or Multivariable Calculus and
Linear Algebra (2500 and 2501); and
3. Methods of Ordinary Differential Equations (2420) or Ordinary Differential Equations (2610).

vanderbilt university

in Physics or Honors in Astronomy) will work with a faculty
mentor to develop an appropriate research project that will be
conducted under the guidance of that faculty member. The
Honors project must have a substantial grounding in physics
or astronomy, but may be conducted under the direct supervision of any faculty member in any department at Vanderbilt.
To be admitted to the Honors Program, a student must submit
a two-page research proposal describing the plans for their
Honors project, which must be approved by the director of the
departmental Honors Program. In addition, a student must have
completed 2953L, either 2255 or 3651, and meet the minimum
GPA requirements for honors programs of the College of Arts
and Science.
To graduate with honors, a student must
•

Have at least a 3.300 cumulative GPA and a 3.300 GPA in
courses that count toward the major.

•

Earn a minimum of 6 credit hours in research classes (3850,
3851, 4998), leading to an honors thesis, with at least 2 of
these credit hours earned in 4998. A student who earns
credit for 3852 may satisfy this portion of the requirement
with 3 credit hours of research earned at Vanderbilt, including at least 2 of these credit hours in 4998.

•

Write a senior thesis of high merit, as evaluated by the
student’s Honors Examination Committee; the thesis may be
submitted either in the fall or spring semester of the senior
year.

•

Demonstrate high attainment on an oral honors examination
in which they present and defend their work to the student’s
Honors Examination Committee; the oral examination may
take place either in the fall or spring semester of the senior
year.

Departmental Minors

In addition, for physics majors considering post-graduate
work in physics or in a related field, the following PHYS and
MATH courses are strongly recommended as electives:

The physics and astronomy minors are suitable for students who
wish to supplement a related discipline or simply have a general
interest in the field. Research is not a requirement for either
minor.

1. Electricity, Magnetism, and Electrodynamics II (PHYS 2291),
Quantum Mechanics II (PHYS 3652), Mathematical Methods
of Physics (PHYS 4005); and

Minor in Physics

2. Methods of Linear Algebra (MATH 2410) or Linear Algebra
(MATH 2600); Introduction to Probability and Mathematical Statistics (MATH 2820); Statistics Laboratory (MATH
2820L); Complex Variables (MATH 3110); Introduction to
Partial Differential Equations (MATH 3120); Fourier Analysis (MATH 3130); and Advanced Engineering Mathematics
(MATH 3600).

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in physics at the secondary level
may qualify by taking the basic physics major together with the
requisite education courses described in the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in the Peabody College section of this catalog.

Honors Program
The Honors Program in the Department of Physics and
Astronomy is designed to allow a student to engage in advanced
research under the guidance of a faculty member, usually in an
area related to an ongoing research program in the department.
A student majoring in physics interested in Honors (Honors

The minor requires a minimum of 19 credit hours of course
work, distributed as follows:
Any first-semester physics class
(1501, 1601, 1911, 2051)

3–4

Any first-semester physics laboratory
(1501L, 1601L, 1912L, 2052)
Any second-semester physics class
(1502, 1602, 1912, 2053)

1
3–4

Any second-semester physics laboratory
(1502L, 1602L, 2255L, 2054)

1

PHYS 2255 or 3651

3

6 credit hours of electives.
6
These may be selected from any 2000-level or
higher-level PHYS courses not used to satisfy the
above requirements or from 3 credit hour non-PHYS courses,
the latter if approved by the director of
undergraduate studies, and may include up to 3 credit hours
of research (3850, 3851, 4998).
		

Total credit hours: 17–19

College of Arts and Science / Political Science

125

Minor in Astronomy

Astronomy

The minor requires a minimum of 16 credit hours of course
work, distributed as follows:

Course descriptions begin on page 150.

ASTR 1010 and either 1010L or 1020L; or 1210

4

ASTR 2110

3

ASTR 3000

3

Two other astronomy courses, one of which may be
a 3 credit hour one-semester research project
(3850, 3851, 4998). Note that only physics majors
pursuing honors in astronomy are eligible to enroll
in 4998.
		

6

Physics
Course descriptions begin on page 200.

Introductory Courses
1001, 1110, 1110L, 1111, 1501, 1501L, 1502, 1502L, 1601, 1601L, 1602,
1602L, 1901, 1902
Introductory, calculus-based physics is offered at several
different levels, each with the appropriate laboratory. Only one
of 1501/1601/1901 and one of 1502/1602/1902 may be taken for
credit. Physics 1501–1502/1501L–1502L is intended for students
in the health sciences. Physics 1601–1602/1601L–1602L is
intended for students in engineering. Physics 1901–1902 is
intended for students planning to major in physics or pursue
research-oriented careers in science, engineering, or mathematics; however, students may major in physics after starting in
any of these three introductory physics sequences. Prospective
majors are strongly advised to begin their study of physics in
the fall semester of their freshman year whenever possible,
although with careful planning it is possible to complete the
physics major with a later start. Physics 1110 is intended for
students without strong backgrounds in mathematics or science
who have a general interest in the subject. 1110 is not recommended as preparation for further study in a natural science, is
not appropriate for engineering, premedical, or pre-dental students, and does not count toward the physics major or minor.

Intermediate Courses
2210, 2250, 2250W, 2260, 2260W, 2270, 2290, 2237, 2660, 3200,
3207, 3600
The intermediate-level courses cover the major subdisciplines of classical and modern physics.

Advanced Courses
2271, 2291, 3640, 3651, 3652, 3660, 3840, 3860, 3890, 4998
These courses are intended for physics majors in their
junior and senior year and provide material supporting independent study or honors projects in physics.

2805, 3125, 3645

Physics Education Courses
3820

Intermediate Courses
2110, 2130, 2220, 2600, 3000

Total credit hours: 16

Medical and Health Physics Courses

Introductory Courses
1001, 1110, 1110L, 1120L, 1111, 1220

Advanced Courses
3600, 3700, 3800, 3900, 3840, 3860, 4998

Political Science
CHAIR David E. Lewis
ASSOCIATE CHAIR Jonathan T. Hiskey
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Carrie A. Russell
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Jonathan T. Hiskey
PROFESSORS EMERITI M. Donald Hancock, Erwin C. Hargrove, William
C. Havard Jr., Richard A. Pride, James Lee Ray, Benjamin Walter
VISITING DISTINGUISHED PROFESSORS David Maraniss, Jon Meacham
PROFESSORS Brooke A. Ackerly, Larry M. Bartels, W. James Booth,
Joshua D. Clinton, John G. Geer, Marc J. Hetherington, Cindy D.
Kam, David E. Lewis, Bruce I. Oppenheimer, Edward Rubin, Mitchell
A. Seligson, Alan Wiseman, Elizabeth J. Zechmeister
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Brett V. Benson, Jonathan T. Hiskey, Noam
Lupu, Efrén O. Pérez, Tariq Thachil
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Allison Anoll, Katherine B. Carroll, Amanda
Clayton, Suzanne Globetti, Brenton Kenkel, Kristin Michelitch, Cecilia
Mo, Peter Schram, Bradley Smith, Sharece Thrower, Keith Weghorst
SENIOR LECTURER Carrie A. Russell

THE Department of Political Science is oriented toward both
teaching and research and has multiple missions. First, it offers a
balanced curriculum for undergraduates and graduate students
to study the art and science of politics. Second, it offers training for students preparing to become professionals in political
science and other fields. Third, it exists as a research faculty
seeking new knowledge about government and politics.
Many members of the faculty have national and international
reputations in their fields of scholarship. These research and
teaching interests vary widely, from political leadership to the
comparison of new and old democratic governments, issues of
political economy, and ethical questions about politics.
Political science majors may participate in independent
study, directed study, selected topics seminars, first-year seminars, the Honors Program, and internships. Average class size
is close to thirty—small classes make personal contact with the
faculty relatively easy. Students participate in the governance
of the department through the Undergraduate Political Science
Association, and may qualify for membership in Pi Sigma
Alpha, the national political science honorary society.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

A&S

126

vanderbilt university

Program of Concentration in Political Science
Students majoring in political science are required to complete
a minimum of 30 credit hours of work, distributed as follows:
Major Concentration

Hours

Political Science Core 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103 or 1150

6

American Government and Politics (2240, 2245, 3241,
2243, 2251, 2255, 2256, 2259, 2262, 2265, 2266, 2267,
2270, 3244, 3247, 3249, 3250, 3252, 3253, 3254,
3260, 3893)

3

Comparative Politics (2210, 2213, 2215, 2219, 2223,
2230, 2236, 2237, 2270, 3211, 3217, 3228, 3235, 3272W,
3894, 4238)

3

International Relations (2221, 2222, 2223, 2225, 2226,
2236, 2263, 2270, 2273, 2274, 3211, 3228, 3229, 3272W,
3275, 3895, 4277)

3

Political Theory (2202, 2203, 2205, 2207, 2207W, 2208,
2209, 2263, 3253, 4257, 3258, 3264W, 3271, 3896)

3

Electives (Any 2000, 3000, or 4000-level course listed above;
3897; one additional 1100-level course,
including 1111; up to 6 credit hours of 3841, 3842, 3851,
3852, 3880, 3882, 3882, 3883, 4998, 4999 combined)
12
		

Minimum 30 credit hours total

In order to graduate with a political science major, students
must take a brief exam within the major concentration in which
they are most interested during their senior year. Students are
to take this exam in the fall of their senior year (students who
are on leave or are studying abroad during the fall semester of
their senior year should schedule the exam upon their return to
campus). The exam is not graded, and no grade will appear on
the student’s transcript. The purpose of the exam is to ascertain
the extent to which political science majors are retaining core
aspects of the political science curriculum.
In meeting the above requirements, students must develop
a specialty within one of the four concentrations of American
Government, Comparative Politics, International Relations, or
Political Theory by taking the introductory, 1000-level course in
that concentration, and at least three 2000-level courses in that
concentration. It is recommended that one of those 2000-level
courses in the student’s selected concentration be a seminar.
Students desiring an emphasis on African American politics
within their program of concentration should consider courses
in the following group: 2240, 2255, 2265, 2266. They may also
choose to elect the following courses at Fisk University: Political
Science 245 (Afro-American Political Thought), 254 (Politics in
the Black Community), and 406 (African Political Systems).
Graduate Courses. Qualified undergraduates may enroll in
graduate courses with the consent of their adviser, the course
instructor, and the Graduate School. To enroll in graduate
courses, undergraduate applicants need to comply with rules
provided under the heading Undergraduate Enrollment in
Graduate Courses in this catalog on p. 64.

Honors Program
To enter the Honors Program, students should have completed all but 6 credit hours of the AXLE requirements, and
have a minimum overall GPA of 3.6. They should also have a

minimum GPA of 3.6 in all the political science courses they
have taken up to the point at which they enter the Honors
Program. They must have exhibited to the department additional evidence of an ability to do independent work. Finally,
they must be nominated by the director of the undergraduate
studies program.
In addition to requirements set by the College of Arts and
Science, the following requirements must be met in order for
honors in political science to be awarded:
1. 30 credit hours in political science, as well as all of the
requirements for political science majors.
2. 3.6 grade point average in all political science courses, and a
3.6 average in courses that count toward honors in political
science.
3. Completion of an honors thesis under the direction of a faculty adviser. Students will enroll in Senior Honors Research
(4998 and 4999) during the semesters when they work on
the honors thesis (at least 3 credit hours each).
4. An oral exam on the honors thesis in the last semester of
the senior year.
Students in the Honors Program are encouraged to take
PSCI 2270 before they enter or during their first semester in the
Honors Program.
A three-member Honors Committee will be appointed to
administer each student’s program. Students should submit the
names of a faculty adviser and the other two members of the
committee to the director of the Honors Program as soon as
possible after they are accepted into the Honors Program. The
committee will administer the oral examination, after which
it will also decide whether the student will receive honors or
highest honors. Successful candidates are awarded honors or
highest honors in their field and this designation appears in the
Commencement program and on their diplomas.

Minors in Political Science
The Department of Political Science offers three minors,
which are detailed below. Each consists of 18 credit hours (one
introductory-level course and five upper-level courses). One of
these options may be chosen:
Minor Concentration

Hours

American Politics
1100 or 1150
3
Any five of the following:
2222, 2240, 2251, 2243, 2245, 2255, 2256, 2259, 2262, 2265,
2266, 2267, 2270, 3241, 3244, 3247, 3249, 3250, 3252, 3253,
3254, 3260, 3268, 3893, 3897
15
Political Theory
1103
Any five of the following:
2202, 2203, 2205, 2207, 2207W, 2208, 2209, 2262,
2263, 3253, 3258, 3264W, 3271, 3896, 4257

3
15

World Politics
A student may stress comparative politics or international
relations or may mix the two in this minor.
3
1101 or 1102

College of Arts and Science / Psychology

Any five of the following:
2210, 2213, 2215, 2216, 2219, 2220, 2222, 2223, 2225, 2226,
2230, 2236, 2237, 2270, 2273, 2274, 3211, 3217, 3228, 3229,
3235, 3272W, 3275, 3894, 3895, 4238, 4277
15

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in political science at the
secondary level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for
Teaching in the Peabody College section of this catalog.
Course descriptions begin on page 202.

Psychology
CHAIR René Marois
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Jo-Anne Bachorowski
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Geoffrey Woodman
DIRECTOR OF CLINICAL TRAINING Bunmi O. Olatunji
PROFESSORS EMERITI William F. Caul, Keith N. Clayton, Ford F. Ebner,
Robert Fox, Jeffery J. Franks, Martin Katahn, Joseph S. Lappin,
Richard D. Odom, William P. Smith, Warren W. Webb
PROFESSORS Randolph Blake, Isabel Gauthier, Steven D. Hollon, Jon H.
Kaas, Gordon D. Logan, Timothy P. McNamara, René Marois, Richard
C. McCarty, Hector Myers, Bunmi O. Olatunji, Thomas J. Palmeri,
Sohee Park, Jeffrey D. Schall, Frank Tong, David Zald
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Jo-Anne Bachorowski, Denise Davis, Suzana
Herculano-Houzel, Kari Hoffman, Sean Polyn, David G. Schlundt,
Andrew J. Tomarken, Thilo Womelsdorf, Geoffrey Woodman
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Anita Disney, Alexander Maier, Jennifer S.
Trueblood
SENIOR LECTURERS Elisabeth H. Sandberg, Adriane E. Seiffert,
Leslie M. Smith

PSYCHOLOGY is the scientific study of brain, behavior, and
cognitive processes. At Vanderbilt, the undergraduate program introduces students to the major areas of contemporary
psychology: clinical science, human cognition and cognitive
neuroscience, developmental psychology, neuroscience, and
social psychology. Clinical science studies human personality, emotion, abnormal behavior, and therapeutic treatments.
Human cognition and cognitive neuroscience includes the
study of processes such as learning, remembering, perceiving
environmental objects and events, and neural mechanisms
underlying these processes. Developmental psychology examines human development from conception through adulthood,
including cognitive, emotional, physical, and social aspects.
Neuroscience studies the structure and function of the brain
and how nerve cells process sensory information about the
environment, mediate decisions, and control motor actions.
Social psychology examines interpersonal and intergroup
relations and the influence of social conditions on cognitive,
emotional, and behavioral processes.
The Department of Psychology offers a general program of
study for students who desire a broad background in contemporary psychology, as well as an honors program. The department offers a wide variety of opportunities for undergraduates
to gain research experience through active participation in faculty research projects. Such research experience is considered a
fundamental aspect of education in experimental psychology.

127
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Programs of Concentration in Psychology
General Program
PSY 1200
PSY 2100 or PSY-PC 2110 (Peabody)
PSY 2150
4 Distribution Courses*
5 Psychology Electives**
Total credit hours: 36
Honors Program
PSY 1200
PSY 2100 or PSY-PC 2110 (Peabody)
PSY 2150
4 Distribution Courses*
PSY 3980 and/or 3981 and both PSY 4998 and 4999
3 Psychology Electives
Students who only take one semester of PSY 3980 or 3981 will need to
take an additional elective course to fulfill their 42 credit hours.
Total credit hours: 42

Honors Program. The Honors Program is a two-year program that offers qualified majors the opportunity to conduct
research projects in collaboration with faculty members. This
research culminates in the writing and public presentation of a
senior thesis.
The Honors Program offers unusual opportunities for interested and qualified students, including special seminars and
individual research projects. The program should substantially
aid those intending to do graduate work.
The program requires two years of honors research, and
participation in the Honors Seminars, PSY 3980 and/or 3981 and
both PSY 4998 and 4999 (at least 9 credit hours total). Under
special circumstances (e.g., a semester abroad or student teaching), students may enroll in only three semesters of the Honors
Seminars—provided they can complete the research project by
extra work during three regular semesters and/or a summer, and
provided this arrangement is acceptable to the faculty mentor and to the director of the Honors Program. Students who
only take one semester of PSY 3980 or 3981 will need to take an
additional elective course to fulfill their 42 credit hours.
Students who are majoring in psychology may apply to the
Honors Program at the end of their sophomore year if they
have a cumulative grade point average of at least 3.3, both overall and in all courses that count toward the psychology major.
Students must also find a faculty mentor who is willing to sponsor them in the program. Students who complete the program
successfully and have a final cumulative and major grade point
average of 3.3 or higher will receive honors or highest honors in
psychology.
* Distribution Courses
(at least 4 of the following 6 courses are required)
The following courses provide grounding in core content areas
of experimental psychology.
PSY 3100, 3110, 3120, 3750; NSC 2201; PSY-PC 1250
(Peabody)
** Electives
Any course in the Department of Psychology (A&S) or the
Department of Psychology and Human Development (Peabody)

A&S

128

vanderbilt university

Public Policy Studies

that is not being used to meet another psychology requirement
can be used as an elective.

Comprehensive Exam

DIRECTOR Katherine Carroll (Political Science)
ADVISORY BOARD Kathryn Anderson (Economics), Jay Clayton (English),
David Lewis (Political Science)
VISITING PROFESSOR David Manning
ADJUNCT PROFESSOR Bill Purcell
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Zdravka Tzankova
SENIOR LECTURER Carrie A. Russell

In order to graduate with a psychology major, students must
take a comprehensive exam during their senior year. Students
are expected to take the comprehensive exam in the fall of their
senior year (students who are on leave or are studying abroad
during the fall semester of their senior year should schedule to
take the exam upon their return to campus). The exam is not
graded, and no grade will appear on the student’s transcript. The
purpose of the exam is to test the extent to which psychology
majors are retaining core aspects of the psychology curriculum.

Minor in Psychology
The minor in psychology is intended for those students who
want to gain an overview of the science of psychology and its
methodological foundations, and to sample more advanced work
in the areas of specialization within psychology at Vanderbilt.
Students are required to complete 18 credit hours of course
work inside the department, distributed as follows:
Psychology 1200
Psychology 2150 and either 2100 or PSY-PC 2110 (Peabody)
Two courses from the list of Distribution Courses
specified for the major
One psychology elective as defined in the
psychology major
		

3
6
6
3

Total credit hours: 18

Independent/Directed Study courses (3850/3850 and
3840/3860) may not be counted as the elective course for minors.
1200 (or 1111, sections 1, 2, and 3) is prerequisite for all other
psychology courses except 1111. PSY 1111 – 01, 02, 03 – General
Psychology, First-Year Writing Seminar – covers the same material as PSY 1200 and also serves as the introductory prerequisite
for all 2000-level courses in psychology. Credit cannot be earned
for both PSY 1200 and PSY 1111 – 01, 02, or 03. PSY 1111– sections 4
and higher – are First-Year Writing Seminars on special topics in
psychology. PSY1111 – sections 4 and higher – do not replace PSY
1200 as a prerequisite for all 2000-level courses in psychology and
may be taken in conjunction with PSY 1200.
Note: NSC courses 2201 (Neuroscience), 3235 (Biological Basis
of Mental Disorders), 3269 (Developmental Neuroscience), 3270
(Computational Neuroscience), 3272 (Structure and Function
of the Cerebral Cortex), and 3274 (Neuroanatomy) count as
courses in the Department of Psychology (A&S). See the Neuroscience course listings for descriptions of these classes.
Course descriptions begin on page 206.

STUDENTS may choose an interdisciplinary program of
concentration in public policy studies. The major requires students to take courses in government, ethics, and social science.
In addition, students develop analytical skills through course
work in research methodology, statistics, and economics. Each
student also chooses a policy track, an area of public policy
they want to explore in depth.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Public Policy Studies
The interdisciplinary major requires 39 credit hours of course
work divided into two parts: 24 credit hours of required core
courses and 12 credit hours of elective courses focusing on one
substantive policy area. A student contemplating a major in
public policy studies must either have AP credit in or take the
following prerequisites: PSCI 1100, 1101, 1102, or 1150; ECON
1010 and 1020. Individual courses included in the program may
specify additional prerequisites. If one of the required courses
is not offered, students may substitute with the permission of
their major adviser.

I. Core Courses (24 credit hours)
1. General (3 credit hours): HOD 2700, Public Policy; PSCI
2256, Politics of Public Policy; or PSCI 2255, Introduction to
Public Policy.
2. Research Methods (3 credit hours): HOD 2500, Systematic Inquiry; PSCI 2270, Conducting Political Research; or
SOC 3002, Introduction to Social Research.
3. Statistics (3 credit hours): ECON 1500, Economic
Statistics; ECON 1510, Intensive Economic Statistics; SOC 2100,
Statistics for Social Scientists; or both MATH 2820, Introduction to Probability and Mathematical Statistics, and Math
2820L, Statistics Laboratory; or PSY-PC 2110, Introduction to
Statistical Analysis.
4. Ethics (3 credit hours): PSCI 3253, Ethics and Public
Policy; or PSCI 2208, Law, Politics and Justice.
5. Public Finance (3 credit hours): HOD 3225, Introduction
to the Public Finance of Education; or ECON 3200, Public
Finance (prerequisite ECON 3010).
6. Government (3 credit hours): any upper-level Political
Science course.
7. Economics (3 credit hours): any upper-level Economics
(ECON) course except 3200.
8. Society and Culture (3 credit hours): any upper-level
Sociology (SOC) course, excluding 3002 and 3003; or any
Anthropology (ANTH) course above 2602, excluding language
classes. Certain humanities courses may also be counted with
the permission of the major adviser.

College of Arts and Science / Religious Studies

II. Policy Track (12 credit hours)
The track is intended to allow students to go more deeply into
one area of public policy (for example: health policy, STEM
policy, education policy, criminal justice policy). Each student is
free to choose and design his or her own track with the advice
and approval of the program director. Classes should generally
be upper-level and should represent at least two disciplines.

III. Capstone Seminar (3 credit hours)
PPS 4960, Senior Seminar on Research in Public Policy, is
required of all Public Policy majors and is taken during their
last year.
Total: 39 credit hours
Course descriptions begin on page 207.

Religious Studies
CHAIR Tony K. Stewart
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN RELIGIOUS STUDIES
Volney P. Gay
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN ISLAMIC STUDIES
Richard McGregor
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN ARABIC
Richard McGregor
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES James Byrd (Divinity)
CHAIR, GRADUATE DEPARTMENT OF RELIGION James Byrd (Divinity)
PROFESSORS EMERITI Lewis V. Baldwin, Charles H. Hambrick,
Daniel M. Patte
PROFESSORS Robert Campany, Volney P. Gay, David Price, Laurel
Schneider, Tony K. Stewart
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Richard McGregor
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Bryan Lowe, Anand Taneja, Alexis WellsOghoghomeh
SENIOR LECTURERS Issam Eido, Bushra Hamad

THE Department of Religious Studies approaches religion as a
fundamentally human experience. The academic study of religion begins descriptively by exploring religious commitments,
identities, practices, worldviews, and institutions. Our courses
investigate religious traditions through varied theoretical and
methodological approaches that generate a complex understanding of religious perspectives from an array of disciplines
such as anthropology, sociology, history, theology, literature,
and art.
Students majoring in religious studies gain a deep knowledge of a single tradition, region, or theme and a broad understanding of religions around the world. Successful students
develop a highly portable analytical skill set that equips them
to pursue graduate degrees in religion or cognate disciplines,
as well as professional degrees and careers in fields such as law,
diplomacy, medicine, and business. It also provides an excellent second major for a variety of disciplines that address the
human condition including neuroscience; sociology; history;
medicine, health, and society; and others. Majors will gain the
ability to reason intelligently about one of the most difficult
and sensitive topics in any society. By virtue of the variety of
religious cultures studied, the training will deepen students’
mutual understanding and sensitivity to prepare them to
become truly responsible global citizens.

129

The department offers a major (31 credit hours), an Honors
Program, a minor (18 credit hours) in religious studies, a
minor (20 credit hours) in Islamic studies, and a minor in
Arabic language (18 credit hours). A student may pursue both
the minor in Islamic studies and the minor in Arabic language.
In such a case, ARA 1102 may be the only Arabic course that
counts toward the minor in Islamic studies.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Religious Studies
31 credit hours. The program of concentration in religious studies seeks to introduce students to the rich diversity of religious
traditions in the world (breadth component) and to build
depth of study in areas of specific interest to the student (depth
component). In addition, the curriculum includes instruction
in the range of theories and methods used to approach religious
traditions academically (tools of the discipline component).
The student will then be able to pursue individual interests
(electives).
A maximum of two courses (6 credit hours) outside of the
department may count toward the major. Of these, one course
(3 credit hours) outside of the department may count toward
the Depth Component. A foreign language course approved
as an elective is not subject to the two-course (6 credit hours)
limit. No course may be used to satisfy more than one of the
four components of the major.

1. Breadth Component (9 credit hours)
Ensures a familiarity with the rich diversity of religious traditions in the world.
a. Encountering religious diversity. 3 credit hours. RLST
1010. An introduction to the field of religious studies
and select traditions.
b. Introductory course in African or Western traditions.
3 credit hours. Introductory course in a religious tradition originating in the Mediterranean, Middle East,
Africa, or the Americas (including but not limited to
Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Egyptian religions, traditions of Sub-Saharan Africa, Native American traditions). RLST 1100, 1200, 1208, 1309, 1500. An appropriate
First-Year Writing Seminar RLST 1111 may count with
the approval of the director of undergraduate studies in
Religious Studies.
c. Introductory course in Asian or non-Western traditions.
3 credit hours. Introductory course in a religious tradition
originating in Asia or the Pacific (including but not limited to Hindu and Buddhist traditions and those religious
traditions originating in East and South Asia). RLST 1637,
1700, 1710, 2644, 2664. An appropriate First-Year Writing
Seminar RLST 1111 may count with the approval of the
director of undergraduate studies in Religious Studies.

2. Depth Component (9 credit hours)
The Depth Component is organized according to three tracks:
traditions, geographies, and theories and themes. The introductory course taken to satisfy the breadth requirement cannot be
double-counted in this category. The student must choose 9
credit hours from one of the following tracks. An appropriate

A&S

130

vanderbilt university

First-Year Writing Seminar RLST 1111 may count toward any
track with the approval of the director of undergraduate studies
in Religious Studies.
a. Traditions. Allows students to focus on a particular
religious tradition or related cluster of traditions that may
transcend geographic limitations.
Buddhist Traditions: RLST 1700, 1710, 1637, 2644, 3669,
3670W, 3749, 3753, 375; ASIA 3633
Christian Traditions: RLST 1309, 1330W, 1820, 2250W,
2310, 3119, 3304W, 3306, 3312, 3313, 3316, 3350; HIST 1760,
2250
Hindu Traditions: RLST 2664, 4665, 4666
Indigenous Traditions: RLST 1637, 3178, 3890, 4774
Islamic Traditions: RLST 1500, 2461, 3561, 4551, 4552,
4554, 4562; ARA 3301; HIST 1190, 2140, 2190
Jewish Traditions: RLST 1200, 1208, 2210, 2210W, 3270,
3350; JS 1002, 1002W, 1200, 2300, 2330, 2620; PHIL 2102
b. Geographies. Gives students the option of focusing on
regional cultures, histories, and religions, as well as relationships between religious traditions within a specific
region.
Africa, West Asia, and the Mediterranean: RLST 1208,
1330W, 1500, 2461, 2471, 2472, 3312, 3890, 4562; ARA 3301;
HIST 1190, 2190
The Americas: RLST 1100, 1190W, 3119, 3142, 3178, 3304;
HIST 2530
East Asia: RLST 1700, 1710, 3747, 3749, 3753, 3670W, 3775,
4774; ASIA 3633
South/Southeast Asia: RLST 1500, 1637, 2644, 2664, 3561,
3669, 3670W, 4665, 4666
c. Theories and Themes. Enables students to focus on theoretical, scientific, or thematic questions that may cross
both traditional and geographic lines.
Religion in the literary and visual arts: RLST 2881, 2940,
3669, 3775, 4665, 4774, 4939
Theories of religion, science, and/or psychology: RLST
1820, 2472, 3079, 3940, 3941, 4834, 4835, 4836, 4837; JS
2330; ANTH 3141

3. Tools of the Discipline Component (4–6 credit hours)
Key issues in the study of religion and a formal introduction to
the theories and methods in the academic study of religion.
a. Theory and Method. 3 credit hours. RLST 4960W
“Approaches to the Academic Study of Religion.” Recommended for juniors, but may be taken earlier with permission of director of undergraduate studies in Religious
Studies.
b. Majors Colloquium. 1 credit hour (may be taken a total of
three times). RLST 4970 “Majors Colloquium.” Initiation
into the range of professional activities in the study of
religion from the craft of research to the production of
papers, articles, and theses, coupled with targeted theoretical concerns relevant to the research of the students
enrolled in that particular class.

4. Electives (9 credit hours)
a. Electives may be drawn from any of the courses listed
under the three components of the major (Breadth, Depth,
and Tools of the Discipline). Students may elect to deepen
an area of study or they may build additional breadth in
other traditions, regions, or themes.
b. One relevant language course (at least 3 credit hours) may
count, with the approval of the director of undergraduate
studies in Religious Studies. This course is not subject to
the two-course (6 credit hours) limit on courses taken
outside the department.

Honors in Religious Studies
The honors thesis provides an opportunity for highly motivated
and exceptionally capable students to engage in independent
work on a topic in religious studies. Honors theses require
original research with primary sources and extensive use of
relevant secondary scholarship, both with regard to the narrowly defined topic of the thesis and on the larger theoretical
and methodological issues in the academic study of religion. 3.3
GPA in courses toward the major and cumulative 3.3 GPA are
required for entry and must be maintained for completion of
honors. Students work closely with faculty members in designing, researching, and writing a thesis beginning in the second
semester of their junior year in order to present the thesis at the
end of the second semester of their senior year, culminating in a
final oral examination on the thesis.
a. Research and Writing. 6 credit hours. RLST 4998–RLST
4999 “Seniors Honors Thesis.” RLST 4998 and RLST 4999
count as 6 of the 9 credit hours of the elective component
of the major.
b. Majors Colloquium – Co-requisite with RLST 4999.
RLST 4970 “Majors Colloquium” in the second semester
of senior year, in which candidate must present results
of research. Honor program candidates shall take 4970
co-requisite with 4999. Initiation into the range of professional activities in the study of religion from the craft of
research to the production of papers, articles, and theses,
coupled with targeted theoretical concerns relevant to the
research of the students enrolled in that particular class.

Minor in Religious Studies
18 credit hours. The minor will introduce the rich diversity of
religious traditions (Breadth component), initiate depth in at
least one tradition (Depth component), and encourage further
exploration of different perspectives or traditions through electives. A maximum of one course (3 credit hours) from outside
the department may count if it is included in any of the three
components of the major (Breadth, Depth, and Tools of the
Discipline). No course may be used to satisfy more than one of
the three components of the minor.

1. Breadth Component (9 credit hours)
Ensures a familiarity with the rich diversity of religious traditions in the world.
a. Encountering religious diversity. 3 credit hours. RLST
1010 Encountering Religious Diversity. An introduction
to the field of religious studies and select traditions.

College of Arts and Science / Scientific Computing

b. Introductory course in African or Western traditions.
3 credit hours. Introductory course in a religious tradition
originating in the Mediterranean, Middle East, Africa,
or the Americas (including but not limited to Judaism,
Christianity, Islam, Egyptian religions, traditions of SubSaharan Africa, Native American traditions). RLST 1100,
1200, 1208, 1309, 1500. An appropriate First-Year Writing
Seminar RLST 1111 may count with the approval of the
director of undergraduate studies in Religious Studies.
c. Introductory course in Asian or non-Western traditions.
3 credit hours. Introductory course in a religious tradition
originating in Asia or the Pacific, including but not limited to Hindu and Buddhist traditions and those religious
traditions originating in East and South Asia. RLST 1637,
1700, 1710, 2644, 2664. An appropriate First-Year Writing
Seminar RLST 1111 may count with the approval of the
director of undergraduate studies in Religious Studies.

2. Depth Component (3 credit hours)
•

Deepening the study of one tradition. 3 credit hours.
The student must choose one of the two religious
traditions used to meet the introductory course Breadth
Component to delve further into that religion.

3. Electives (6 credit hours)
a. Electives may be drawn from any of the courses listed
under the three components of the major (Breadth,
Depth, and Tools of the Discipline). Students may elect
to deepen an area of study or they may build additional
breadth in other traditions, regions, or themes.
b. With the permission of the director of undergraduate
studies in Religious Studies and a minimum 3.3 GPA in
the minor, the student may take the Majors Colloquium
RLST 4970.

Minor in Islamic Studies
20 credit hours. Students complete a required minimum of 20
credit hours from the list below, which must include Arabic
1102, Elementary Arabic; Religious Studies 1500, Introduction to
Islam; and Religious Studies 4554, The Qur’an and Its Interpreters. The maximum number of credit hours to be counted toward
the minor from Arabic language courses is 8. No credit hours
will be counted for Arabic 1101.
ARABIC: 1102, Elementary Arabic; 2201–2202, Intermediate Arabic; 3101–
3102, Advanced Arabic; 3201, Media Arabic; 3301, Arabic of the Qur’an
and Other Classical Texts.
CINEMA AND MEDIA ARTS: 3892, Cinema and Islam.
CLASSICAL AND MEDITERRANEAN STUDIES: 2180, Mediterranean
World from Late Antiquity to the Middle Ages; 3010, The Ancient Origins of
Religious Conflict in the Middle East.
HISTORY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (when related to Islamic history
or culture as determined by the director of undergraduate studies); 1160,
Modern South Asia; 1190, A History of Islam; 1200, The Arab Spring; 1270,
Sub-Saharan Africa: 1400–1800; 1280, Africa since 1800: The Revolutionary Years; 2140, The Mughal World; 2150, India and the Indian Ocean;
2155, Muhammad and Early Islam; 2160 Medicine in Islam; 2170, Islam
and the Crusades; 2180, Islamic Narratives: Narratives of Islam; 2190, Last
Empire of Islam; 2530, African Religions in the Americas; 3150, Cities of Europe and the Middle East; 3210, Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Medieval
Spain; 3220W Images of India.

131
HINDI/URDU: 1101–1102 Elementary Hindi-Urdu; 2201–2202 Intermediate
Hindi-Urdu.
HISTORY OF ART: 1220, History of Asian Art and Architecture, 2180, Art
and Architecture of the Islamic World.
JEWISH STUDIES: 2540, Power and Diplomacy in Modern Middle East;
2600, Islam and the Jews.
PHILOSOPHY: 2102, Medieval Philosophy; 3006, Islamic Philosophy.
POLITICAL SCIENCE: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar (when related to
Islamic history or culture as determined by the director of undergraduate
studies); 2203, Middle East Politics; 3235, Political Islam; 3272W, The War
in Iraq 2002–2011; 3896, Selected Topics (when related to Islamic politics
or culture as determined by the director of undergraduate studies).
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 1500, Introduction to Islam; 1111, First-Year Writing
Seminar (when related to Islamic religion or culture as determined by the director of undergraduate studies); 1500, Introduction to Islam; 2461, Islam in
Africa; 3271, Religion in Africa; 4551, Islamic Mysticism; 4552, Islam in the
Modern World: Reformers of the Islamic Tradition; 4554, The Qur’an and Its
Interpreters; 4562, Culture, Religion, and Politics of the Arab World; 4666,
Devotional Traditions of South Asia: Hindu, Muslim, Sikh; 4592, Advanced
Seminar in Arabic; 4593, Advanced Seminar in Islamic Tradition.

Minor in Arabic Language
18 credit hours. Students complete a required minimum of 18
credit hours from the list below, following one of two tracks.
Track A “Foundations and Literature”: 9 credit hours from
category I, Grammar and Constructions and 9 credit hours from
category II, Literature and Culture. Track B “Full Proficiency”:
12 credit hours from category I, Grammar and Constructions,
and 6 credit hours from category II, Literature and Culture. No
credit hours will be counted for Arabic 1101 or Arabic 1102.
CATEGORY I, Grammar and Constructions: ARA 2201, Intermediate Arabic I; 2202, Intermediate Arabic II; ARA 3101, Advanced Arabic I; 3102,
Advanced Arabic II.
CATEGORY II, Literature and Culture: ARA 3201, Media Arabic; ARA 3301,
Arabic of the Qur’an and Other Classical Texts; RLST 4592, Reading Seminar in Arabic Literature; RLST 4593, Reading Seminar in Islamic Tradition.
Course descriptions begin on page 207.

Scientific Computing
DIRECTORS Robert E. Bodenheimer (Computer Science), Thomas J.
Palmeri (Psychology), David A. Weintraub (Physics and Astronomy)
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Ralf Bennartz (Earth and Environmental Sciences),
Gautam Biswas (Electrical Engineering and Computer Science), Mario
Crucini (Economics), Peter T. Cummings (Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering), Mark N. Ellingham (Mathematics), David Furbish (Earth
and Environmental Sciences), Shane Hutson (Physics), Gordon D.
Logan (Psychology), Terry P. Lybrand (Chemistry and Pharmacology),
Clare M. McCabe (Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering), Jens
Meiler (Chemistry), Michael I. Miga (Biomedical Engineering), Mark
Neamtu (Mathematics), Thomas J. Palmeri (Psychology and
Neuroscience), Antonis Rokas (Biological Sciences and Biomedical
Informatics), Jeffrey D. Schall (Psychology and Neuroscience), Larry
Schumaker (Mathematics), Paul Sheldon (Physics), Kalman Varga
(Physics), David A. Weintraub (Astronomy), Robert Weller (Electrical
Engineering)

A&S

132
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Andreas A. Berlind (Astronomy), Robert
E. Bodenheimer (Computer Science), Guilherme Gualda (Earth and
Environmental Sciences), Kelly Holley-Bockelmann (Astronomy),
Haoxiang Luo (Mechanical Engineering), Sean Polyn (Psychology and
Neuroscience), Greg Walker (Mechanical Engineering), Steve Wernke
(Anthropology)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Gerald H. Roth
(Computer Science)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Tony Capra (Biological Sciences), Bennett
Landman (Electrical Engineering), Carlos Lopez (Cancer Biology),
Jennifer Trueblood (Psychology), William Holmes (Physics and
Astronomy)
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSOR William R. French (Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering)

THE College of Arts and Science and the School of Engineering offer an interdisciplinary minor in scientific computing to
help students in the physical, biological, and social sciences as
well as engineering acquire the ever-increasing computational
skills that such careers demand. Students who complete this
minor will have a toolkit that includes programming skills useful for simulating physical, biological, and social dynamics as
well as an understanding of how to take advantage of modern
software tools to extract meaningful information from small
and large data sets.
Computation is now an integral part of modern science.
Computer simulation allows the study of natural phenomena
impossible or intractable through experimental means. Astronomers studying the formation of massive black holes, neuroscientists studying brain networks for human memory, economists
studying effects of regulation on market dynamics, and biochemists studying the three-dimensional structure of proteins
are united in many of the computational challenges they face
and the tools and techniques they use to solve these challenges.
Students pursuing the scientific computing minor are
taught techniques for understanding such complex physical,
biological, and social systems. Students are introduced to
computational methods for simulating and analyzing models
of complex systems, to scientific visualization and data mining techniques needed to detect structure in massively large
multidimensional data sets, to high-performance computing
techniques for simulating models on computing clusters with
hundreds or thousands of parallel, independent processors and
for analyzing terabytes or more of data that may be distributed
across a massive cloud or grid storage environment.
The scientific computing minor at Vanderbilt is supported
by faculty and includes students from a wide range of scientific and engineering disciplines. While the content domain
varies, these disciplines often require similar computational
approaches, high-performance computing resources, and
skills to simulate interactions, model real-life systems, and test
competing hypotheses. Scientific computing embodies the
computational tools and techniques for solving many of the
grand challenges facing science and engineering today.
The minor in scientific computing prepares students
for advanced course work that combines computational
approaches with a substantive area of science or engineering.
It prepares students for directed or independent study with a
faculty member on a research project. It prepares students for
advanced study in graduate school. It provides skills that will
be attractive to many employers after graduation.
The minor in scientific computing is distinct from the
minor in computer science. Scientific computing uses computation as a tool to solve scientific and engineering problems
in research and application. It is more focused on simulation,

vanderbilt university

numerical techniques, high performance computing, and
higher-level methods than the minor in computer science,
which is focused on the algorithms, systems, and technologies
that enable such methods to be developed and employed.
Details of the minor requirements are provided in the
School of Engineering section of the catalog, and are also available at vanderbilt.edu/scientific_computing.

Sociology
CHAIR Larry W. Isaac
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES David J. Hess
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Richard Pitt
PROFESSORS EMERITI Karen E. Campbell, Jack P. Gibbs, Walter R.
Gove, Gary F. Jensen, Ronnie Steinberg, R. Jay Turner
PROFESSORS André Christie-Mizell, Daniel B. Cornfield, David J. Hess,
Larry W. Isaac, Holly J. McCammon, Jonathan M. Metzl
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS George Becker, Laura M. Carpenter, Shaul
Kelner, Richard Lloyd, Evelyn Patterson, Richard Pitt, Mariano Sana,
Lijun Song, Zdravka Tzankova
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Christy Erving, Joshua Murray, LaTonya Trotter
SENIOR LECTURERS Joe Bandy, Amy Cooter, Rosevelt Noble
LECTURERS Will Hale, Terrie Spetalnick, Laurie Woods

SOCIOLOGY, the study of social consensus, conflict, and
change, offers students a rich and systematic understanding of
society and the meaning of social interaction. The department’s
courses cover a wide range of sociological themes including
arts, culture, and religion; cities, states, and political economy;
deviant behavior and crime; gender and sexuality; health and
the life course; race, ethnicity, and immigration; social movements, politics, and power; environment and population;
and work, labor, and occupations. Undergraduate courses in
sociology prepare students for graduate work or provide further
preparation for a career in law, medicine, business, research,
education, the clergy, nursing, social work, or civil service. Two
major programs are available. Students may declare only one
of the majors offered by the Department of Sociology; double
majors within the department are not permitted.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Sociology
Students majoring in sociology are required to complete 33
credit hours of work in sociology (36 credit hours for students
in the Honors Research Track). The major consists of five
types of courses as listed below: introduction, theory, research
skills, core areas, and electives.
Course work for the major is distributed as follows:
Program I (Standard Track)
A total of 33 credit hours as follows:
1) Introduction: Sociology 1010, 1010W, 1020, or 1020W
2) Theory: Sociology 3001
3) Research Skills: Sociology 3002 (or HOD 2500 for
students who double major in sociology and HOD)
4) Core Areas

3
3
3
9

College of Arts and Science / Sociology

Students must take at least one course in three
of the four core areas listed below. A course cannot
be used to satisfy more than one requirement in
the major.
Culture, Institutions, and Socialization
		 Sociology 3201, 3202, 3203, 3204, 3205, 3206, 3213,
3221, 3222, 3223, 3224, 3231, 3232, 3233
Health, Environment, Population, and Migration
		 Sociology 3301, 3302, 3303, 3304, 3311, 3312, 3313, 3314,
3315, 3316, 3317, 3318, 3321, 3322; Environmental and
Sustainability Studies 4101; Medicine, Health, and
Society 2310, 2430
Politics, Law, and Conflict
		 Sociology 3233, 3601, 3602, 3603, 3604, 3605, 3611,
3612, 3613, 3614, 3615, 3616, 3621, 3622, 3623, 3624;
Jewish Studies 2560
Race, Ethnicity, and Gender
		 Sociology 3601, 3615, 3616, 3701, 3702, 3703, 3704,
3711, 3722, 3723, 3724; Jewish Studies 2400, 2450
5) Electives
15
Any 5 sociology courses not used to satisfy the above
requirements. SOC 2100 or its equivalent may be counted
toward the electives. (Equivalent courses are ECON 1500
or 1510 or MATH 1011 or 2820. Students who double
major in sociology and psychology or in sociology and
the Peabody majors of human and organizational development, child development, cognitive studies, or child
studies may also choose from PSY 2100 or PSY‐PC 2110.)
Electives may also include only one of the following 1000‐
level sociology courses: Sociology 1041, 1041W, or 1111.
No other 1000‐level sociology course may be counted
toward the electives requirement of the major except
by permission of the director of undergraduate studies.
The Department of Sociology advises students to group
their elective sociology courses in a cluster of advanced
concentration electives to be selected with the student’s
adviser. See the director of undergraduate studies or the
departmental website for suggested clusters: as.vanderbilt.
edu/sociology/undergraduate/major.
Program II (Honors Research Track)
A total of 36 credit hours as follows:
The Honors Research Track offers superior majors in
sociology the opportunity to pursue intensive work through an
independent research project. Students interested in pursuing
the Honors Research Track in Sociology should contact the
director of undergraduate studies for more information. To
be considered for the Honors Research Track in Sociology, a
student must have a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.3 and a
minimum GPA of 3.3 for courses that count toward the sociology major. Students who are recommended for the program by
the director of undergraduate studies will typically begin the
program in the first semester of their junior or senior year.
The Honors Research Track in Sociology requires:
1) Successful completion of requirements 1–4 in Program I,
for a total of 18 credit hours.
2) Successful completion of the statistics requirement:
SOC 2100 or its equivalent (defined in requirement 5 of
Program I).
3) Completion of 12 credit hours of elective courses. The
statistics requirement is counted toward the electives.
Electives may include only one of the following 1000‐level
sociology courses: Sociology 1041, 1041W, or 1111. No other
1000‐level sociology course may be counted toward the

133

electives requirement of the major except by permission
of the director of undergraduate studies. If students take
more than 6 credit hours of SOC 4981, the additional
credit hours (7–12) are counted toward the elective courses.
4) Successful completion of at least two semesters of SOC
4981 (Honors Research). The first semester of 4981 (Honors Research) is a 3 credit hour seminar in which students
develop the literature review and research plan for the
honors thesis. In the second semester of 4981 (Honors
Research), also for 3 credit hours, students must complete
the research and data collection, data analysis, and initial
write-up of results of the thesis. Students may elect to take
a third or fourth semester of 4981 during their senior year,
when they may, for example, work on revisions of the project and/or on publication. Students who begin the Honors
Track in their senior year may also take more than 6 credit
hours of 4981, up to a maximum of 12 credit hours.
5) Successful defense of the completed thesis through an
oral defense attended by the chair and reader of the thesis; this oral defense typically takes place during the second semester of the student’s senior year. In order to earn
honors in sociology, students must successfully complete
and defend an honors thesis before graduation.

Comprehensive Exam
In order to graduate with a sociology major, students must take
a comprehensive exam during their senior year. The exam is
not graded, and no grade will appear on the student’s transcript.
The purpose of the exam is to test the extent to which sociology
majors are retaining core aspects of the sociology curriculum.

Program of Concentration in Environmental Sociology
Environmental sociology is the study of the relationship between
modern societies and the environment at a variety of scales,
from households to global relations. It includes issues such as
public understanding of environmental issues, the environment
and inequality, environmental social movements and social
change, and analysis of environmental reform and adaptation.
Environmental sociology is different from environmental science, which is based in the natural sciences, and environmental
studies, which includes courses from a wide range of disciplines,
including engineering and the humanities. The department’s
program in environmental sociology includes a solid introduction to sociology and sociological methods as well as foundation
requirements in environmental science. The program prepares
students for careers in government, the law, management,
research and teaching, and the nonprofit sector.
Students majoring in environmental sociology are required
to complete 33 credit hours of course work. The major consists
of four types of courses: foundation social science courses,
foundation environmental science courses, research skills, and
environmental sociology courses.
Program I (Standard Track)
A total of at least 33 credit hours as follows:
1) Foundation Courses in Sociology
SOC 1020 or 1020W, SOC 3001

6 credit hours

2) Foundation Courses in Environmental
Sciences
at least 6 credit hours
Two courses from EES 1510, 1030, 1070, 1080, 1140, 1111,**
2150, 2510,* 3220,* 3310,* 4680,* 4750,* 4820;* at least
one of which must address climate-related issues (EES
1080, 1140, 2110,* 2150, 2510,*4680,* 4820,* or another

A&S

134

vanderbilt university

EES course as approved by the director of undergraduate
studies of Environmental Sociology).
*Requires EES 1510 and the lab EES 1510L as prerequisites.
**1111s require permission of the director of Environmental
Sociology.
3) Research Skills
6 credit hours
SOC 2100 (or other statistics course approved by the
director of undergraduate studies of Environmental Sociology) followed by or concurrent with SOC 3002 or HOD
2500 for those majoring in HOD.
4) Environmental Sociology Core
15 credit hours
15 credit hours selected from the following:
SOC 3311, 3312, 3313, 3314, 3315, 3316, 3317, 3318, 3321, 3604,
3605, 3881,* 4961;* ENVS 4101
*As approved by the director of undergraduate studies of
Environmental Sociology
Program II (Honors Research Track in Environmental Sociology)
A total of at least 36 credit hours as follows:
The Honors Research Track offers superior majors in environmental sociology the opportunity to pursue intensive work
through an independent research project. Students interested
in pursuing the Honors Research Track in Environmental
Sociology should contact the director of undergraduate studies
of Sociology for more information. To be considered for the
Honors Research Track in Environmental Sociology, a student
must have a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.3 and a minimum
GPA of 3.3 for courses that count toward the environmental
sociology major. Students who are recommended for the
program by the director of undergraduate studies of Sociology
will typically begin the program in the first semester of their
junior or senior year.
The Honors Research Track in Environmental Sociology
requires:
1) Successful completion of requirements 1 through 3 in the
Standard Track.
2) At least 12 credit hours from requirement 4 in the Standard Track.
3) Successful completion of at least two semesters of SOC
4981 (Honors Research). The first semester of 4981
(Honors Research) is a 3 credit hour seminar in which
students develop the literature review and research plan
for the honors thesis. In the second semester of 4981
(Honors Research), also for 3 credit hours, students must
complete the research and data collection, data analysis,
and initial write-up of results of the thesis. Students may
elect to take a third or fourth semester of 4981 during
their senior year, when they may, for example, work on
revisions of the project and/or on publication. Students
who begin the Honors Program in their senior year may
also take more than 6 credit hours of 4981, up to a maximum of 12 credit hours.
4) Successful defense of the completed thesis through an
oral defense attended by the chair and reader of the thesis; this oral defense typically takes place during the second semester of the student’s senior year. To earn honors
in environmental sociology, students must successfully
complete and defend an honors thesis before graduation.

Comprehensive Exam
In order to graduate with an environmental sociology major,
students must take a comprehensive exam during their senior

year. The exam is not graded, and no grade will appear on
the student’s transcript. The purpose of the exam is to test
the extent to which majors are retaining core aspects of the
environmental sociology curriculum.

Minor in Sociology
The minor in sociology is intended for those students who
want to gain an overview of the discipline and to sample some
of the special lines of study in it.
Students are required to complete 18 credit hours of course
work inside the department, distributed as follows:
1. Sociology 1010, 1010W, or 1020, 1020W
2. Sociology 3001
3. Four courses, including at least one from three of
the four core areas listed in above major
		

3
3
12

Total credit hours: 18

Licensure for Teaching
Candidates for teacher licensure in sociology at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.
Course descriptions begin on page 212.

Spanish and Portuguese
CHAIR Benigno Trigo
VICE CHAIR Andrés Zamora
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES María Paz Pintané
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES José Cárdenas Bunsen
PROFESSORS EMERITI M. Fräncille Bergquist, Susan Berk-Seligson,
Cathy L. Jrade, C. Enrique Pupo-Walker
PROFESSORS Earl E. Fitz, Edward H. Friedman, Ruth Hill, William Luis,
Philip D. Rasico, Benigno Trigo, Andrés Zamora
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Victoria A. Burrus, Christina KarageorgouBastea, Emanuelle Oliveira-Monte
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS José Cárdenas Bunsen, N. Michelle Murray
MELLON ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Anna Castillo
SENIOR LECTURERS Frances Alpren, José Luis Aznar, Lorraine
Catanzaro, Rachel R. Chiguluri, Sarah Delassus, Heraldo Falconi,
Victoria Gardner, Chalene Helmuth, Clint Hendrix, Stacey Johnson,
Benjamin Legg, Alicia Lorenzo-García, Patrick Murphy, Elena
Olazagasti-Segovia, Amarilis Ortiz, Carolina Palacios, María Paz
Pintané, Cynthia M. Wasick
LECTURER Katherine Wesolek

THE Department of Spanish and Portuguese offers a wide
range of courses in the language, culture, and literature of
Spain and Spanish America and is well known for its program
in Portuguese and Brazilian studies. Intensive Elementary
Catalan is also offered.
The department offers programs of concentration in both
Spanish and Spanish and Portuguese. Majors take courses in
language, literature, linguistics, and culture. Interdisciplinary
majors are available in Spanish and European Studies or in
Spanish, Portuguese, and European Studies. Qualified Spanish majors may elect to take graduate courses in their senior
year or participate in honors work. Minors in Spanish and in
Portuguese are also offered.

College of Arts and Science / Spanish and Portuguese

The department serves majors from the Center for Latin
American Studies and the Max Kade Center for European and
German Studies. On the graduate level, the department offers
a doctoral program in Spanish and a combination doctoral
degree in Spanish and Portuguese.
Many students participate in Vanderbilt programs in Sevilla,
Barcelona, Palma de Mallorca, Argentina, Chile, Cuba, the
Dominican Republic, and Brazil. Maymesters in Spain and Peru
are also offered. Activities organized by the department include
lectures, films, symposia, and Brazil Week. The department
has a chapter of the national honor society Sigma Delta Pi for
students of Spanish. Students are encouraged to apply for living
space in the Spanish Hall of McTyeire International House.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Spanish
The major consists of 30 credit hours in Spanish courses
numbered 3301W and above. The distribution requirements
are as follows:
1. Core requirements: 3301W, 3302, and 3303.
2. Literature: Nine credit hours from courses numbered
4400–4980 or 3835 or 3893.
3. Linguistics: Three credit hours from courses numbered
4300–4360 or 3892.
4. Electives: Nine credit hours from courses numbered 3320–
3835 or 3891–4980. Students may substitute 3 credit hours of
a language course in either Portuguese (1103 or higher) or
Catalan (1103 or higher).
A more advanced composition course may be substituted
for 3301W. A more advanced conversation course may be
substituted for 3302. Spanish 3303 is the prerequisite for all
literature courses offered by the department. Students must
take Spanish 3301W, 3302, and 3303 in order to participate in
most study abroad programs. Seniors are eligible to take one or
two graduate-level courses (7000 and above) with the approval
of the instructor and the chair of the department.

Honors Program in Spanish
Candidates for honors in Spanish who meet college and
departmental requirements must complete 36 credit hours in
Spanish courses numbered 3301W and above. Students satisfy
the requirements of the 30-credit-hour major in Spanish, in
which one of the required literature courses is either the
undergraduate seminar, Spanish 4980 (3 credit hours), which
may be taken during either the junior or senior year, or a
graduate seminar (course numbered 7000–9520) approved by
the adviser to the Honors Program, which may only be taken
during the senior year. (If Spanish 4980 has not been available,
it may, with permission of the adviser to the Honors Program,
be substituted by an “enriched” undergraduate literature
course in which the instructor assigns outside research and a
second or longer term paper to an honors candidate.)
The remaining 6 credit hours of the honors major consist
of a senior honors thesis, which is completed during the senior
year as independent study (Spanish 4998–4999) under the
direction of a faculty adviser. Candidates must submit a proposal for the thesis to their prospective faculty adviser no later
than the second semester of their junior year. The completed

135

thesis must be submitted within the second semester of the
senior year (deadlines are available from the department). An
oral examination on the thesis and the general area of research,
administered by a committee of the department, will follow.

Minor in Spanish
The minor in Spanish consists of a minimum of 18 credit hours.
The specific requirements are as follows:
Spanish 3301W (A more advanced composition course
may be substituted)
3
Spanish 3302 (A more advanced conversation course
may be substituted)
3
Spanish 3303
3
Three credit hours of advanced Spanish literature chosen
from courses numbered from 4400–4980 or 3835
or 3893
3
Six credit hours of electives chosen from Spanish courses
numbered 3320–3835, 3891–4980
6
		

Total credit hours: 18

A&S

Minor in Portuguese
The minor in Portuguese consists of a minimum of 15 credit
hours. The specific requirements are as follows:
Portuguese 2203 (Intermediate Portuguese; a more
advanced language course may, subject to approval
by the department, be substituted)
3
One of the following two courses: Portuguese 3301
(Portuguese Composition and Conversation) or
Portuguese 3302 (Brazilian Pop Culture)
3
Portuguese 3303 (Introduction to Luso-Brazilian
Literature)
3
At least one of the following two courses: Portuguese
4420 (Brazilian Literature through the Nineteenth
Century) or Portuguese 4425 (Modern Brazilian
Literature)
3
At least 3 additional credit hours selected from among the
courses listed below (or a graduate course numbered 7000–
9520 for qualified seniors; procedures may be found in the
Academic Regulations section of the Undergraduate Catalog).
Portuguese 4350 (Brazilian Culture through Native
Material), 4420 (Brazilian Literature through the
Nineteenth Century), 4425 (Modern Brazilian
Literature), 3892 (Special Topics in Portuguese
3
Language, Literature, and Civilization)
		

Total credit hours: 15

Program of Concentration in Spanish and Portuguese
This major focuses on the two dominant languages (Spanish
and Portuguese) of the Iberian Peninsula and Latin America
and their literatures and cultures. The basic requirement for
this major is a minimum of 33 credit hours in Spanish and
Portuguese. The distribution is as follows:
1. Core requirements of Spanish 3301W, 3302, and 3303; Portuguese 2203, 3301 (or 3302), and 3303.
2. At least two Spanish courses numbered between 3320–3330,
3355–3385, 4400–4980 or 3835, 3891 or 3893.
3. At least two of the following Portuguese courses: 3892, 4350,
4420, 4425, 7070, 7071, and 9520.

136

vanderbilt university

4. One additional elective to be chosen from the courses listed
under area 2 and 3 above.
A student who studies abroad may be able to substitute
similar culture or literature courses with the permission of the
director of undergraduate studies.

Program of Concentration in Spanish and European Studies
Students pursuing the interdisciplinary major in Spanish and
European studies combine their focus on Spanish language
and literature with a study of modern Europe in its political, economic, and cultural diversity. Students may elect this
interdisciplinary major, which requires a minimum of 42 credit
hours of course work. A semester of study abroad in Spain is
recommended. Course work for the major is distributed as
follows:
Spanish (27 credit hours)
Spanish language and literature core courses (9 credit hours):
Spanish 3301W, 3302, and 3303 (a more advanced composition course may be substituted for 3301W; a more
advanced conversation course may be substituted for
3302)
Spanish culture and civilization (6 credit hours): Two of the
following: Spanish 3320, 3325, 3360, 3365, 3891
Spanish literature (6 credit hours): Two Spanish courses
numbered from 4400–4980 or 3835 or 3893
Elective (6 credit hours): Two additional Spanish courses that
count toward the Spanish major. Students may substitute
3 credit hours of a language course in either Portuguese
(1103 or higher) or Catalan (1103 or higher).
European Studies (15 credit hours)
European Studies core courses (9 credit hours): EUS 2201,
2203, and 4960 (requires thesis)
Social Science (3 credit hours): PSCI 2210, 3211, or appropriate
substitute with the approval of the EUS adviser
History (3 credit hours): One course in European history
selected from: History 2250, 2260, 2270, 2280, 2290, 2450
or another course in European history in consultation
with the EUS adviser

Program of Concentration in Spanish, Portuguese,
and European Studies
Students pursuing the interdisciplinary major in Spanish, Portuguese, and European studies combine their focus on Spanish
and Portuguese language and literature with a study of modern
Europe in its political, economic, and cultural diversity.
Students may elect this interdisciplinary major, which requires
a minimum of 42 credit hours of course work. A semester of
study abroad in Spain is recommended. Course work for the
major is distributed as follows:
Spanish (18 credit hours)
Spanish language and literature core courses (9 credit
hours): Spanish 3301W, 3302, and 3303 (a more advanced
composition course may be substituted for 3301W; a
more advanced conversation course may be substituted
for 3302)
Spanish culture and civilization (3 credit hours): One of the
following: Spanish 3320, 3325, 3360, 3365, 3891
Spanish literature (3 credit hours): Any Spanish course
numbered from 4400–4980 or 3835 or 3893

Elective (3 credit hours): Any additional Spanish course that
counts toward the Spanish major
Portuguese (9 credit hours)
Portuguese language and literature courses (6 credit hours):
Portuguese 2203 and 3303
Brazilian culture and civilization (3 credit hours):
Portuguese 4350
European Studies (15 credit hours)
European Studies core courses (9 credit hours): EUS 2201,
2203, and 4960 (requires thesis)
Social Science (3 credit hours): PSCI 2210, 3211 or appropriate substitute from any other social studies discipline
with approval of the EUS adviser
History (3 credit hours): One course in European history
selected from: History 2250, 2260, 2270, 2280, 2290,
2450 or another course in European history in consultation with the EUS adviser

Teacher Licensure
Candidates for teacher licensure in Spanish at the secondary
level should refer to the chapter on Licensure for Teaching in
the Peabody College section of this catalog.

Catalan
Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 153.

Portuguese
Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language.
Course descriptions begin on page 205.

Spanish
Entering students should consult their advisers or the director of
undergraduate studies at the Department of Spanish and Portuguese for advice on placement. Students who have not studied
Spanish in high school should begin their studies at Vanderbilt in
Spanish 1100. Students with high school Spanish on their records
must present a department placement test score in Spanish to
be placed correctly. (See department website for more details.)

College of Arts and Science / Theatre

Students with a score of 4 or 5 on the AP Spanish Language or
Literature examination should register for Spanish 3301W (Intermediate Spanish Writing).
Note: Students may not earn credit for an introductory language
course if they previously have earned credit for a higher-level
course taught in that same language. In addition, students may
not earn credit for an intermediate-level language course if they
previously have earned credit for a higher-level course taught in
that same language. Students who have earned Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credit in a foreign language
will forfeit the test credit if they complete a lower-level course
taught in that same language. Exception: Students who take Spanish 3301W do not forfeit credit for Spanish 3302.
Course descriptions begin on page 215.

Teacher Education
STUDENTS interested in preparing for licensure as early childhood, elementary, special education, or secondary school teachers should meet with Associate Dean Roger Moore, College of
Arts and Science, as soon as possible to initiate discussion with
appropriate personnel in teacher education.
Specific information on program requirements will be
found under Licensure for Teaching in the Peabody College
section of this catalog.

Early Childhood and Elementary Education
Students interested in preparing to teach early childhood or
elementary school pupils major in a single discipline or an
interdisciplinary program in the College of Arts and Science as
well as in education at Peabody College.

Secondary Education
The College of Arts and Science and Peabody College offer
teacher education programs leading to secondary school
teacher licensure in the following fields:
English
Mathematics
Science (Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Earth and
Environmental Sciences, Physics)
Social Studies (History and Political Science). Economics, Psychology, and Sociology may become additional
endorsement areas for students who also have selected
history or political science as an endorsement area.
Students major in an academic discipline in the College of
Arts and Science and complete a second major in education at
Peabody College.

Special Education
Students interested in preparing to teach children with special
needs major in special education at Peabody College. Areas of
teacher licensure available are mild and moderate disabilities,
multiple and severe disabilities, visual impairment, hearing
impairment, and early childhood special education.

137

Theatre
CHAIR M. Leah Lowe
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Jon W. Hallquist
PROFESSORS EMERITI Robert A. Baldwin, Cecil D. Jones Jr.
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS E. Christin Essin, Phillip N. Franck, Jon W.
Hallquist, Terryl W. Hallquist, M. Leah Lowe
SENIOR LECTURERS Alexandra A. Sargent, Matthew D. Stratton
WRITERS IN RESIDENCE Diana Grisanti, Stephen Moulds

VANDERBILT’S Department of Theatre offers a vital center of
innovative scholarship, teaching, creative expression, and exploration. The study of theatre introduces students to a major form
of literature and performing arts, thereby developing a familiarity with one of the greatest cultural heritages and an understanding of human behavior and civilization as it is reflected through
the ages. Theatre uniquely shapes perceptions about life into
an active experience. Because this process encourages critical
thought and discussion, the department provides a singular and
important aspect of a liberal arts education through its production season and course work. Viewed as a practical extension
of the department’s curriculum, plays are produced in Neely
Auditorium, a laboratory where students learn to form creative
expressions as well as to evaluate and to critique them.
On one level, the Department of Theatre helps the general
liberal arts student develop reasoned standards of criticism
and an understanding of the intimate correlation between the
theatre and the society which it reflects, preparing Vanderbilt
graduates for successful careers in theatre as well as other fields
of interest. For its majors and minors, the department provides
a more detailed and specialized study of the major components of theatrical endeavor, allowing opportunities for the
practical application of course work in the productions staged
at the theatre. In many cases, the department helps to prepare
students with professional aspirations as either artists or teachers in their specialized area of interest.
Work in the productions at Vanderbilt reflects the instruction that occurs in the classroom at Neely Auditorium. Because
the academic endeavors require hands-on, project-oriented
teaching, students can expect small-to-medium class enrollments and numerous opportunities for exposure to faculty
instruction outside of the classroom. The department’s curriculum includes courses in acting, directing, design, technology, dramatic literature, theatre history and criticism, and
playwriting. Students can either major or minor in theatre at
Vanderbilt. The major consists of a minimum of 35 credit hours
that include courses in acting, directing, dramatic literature,
theatre history/criticism, design, technology, and stagecraft.
For the minor, students select one of three more narrowly
focused tracks (dramatic literature/theatre history, acting/
directing, or design/technology) and complete a minimum of
18 credit hours of course work.
Students may also learn about theatre by studying with
Coe Artists, distinguished guest-artist professionals brought to
campus each year to benefit majors, minors, and those with a
serious interest in theatre. Weeklong master classes are taught
by playwrights, actors, designers, and directors from the professional world of theatre, television, and film. Previous Coe
Artists have included such celebrated artists as Karl Malden,
Olympia Dukakis, Fiona Shaw, Eva Marie Saint, the Living
Theatre, and Actors from the London Stage. The Department of Theatre also offers a month-long program of study of
theatre in London during the May session. Students have the

A&S

138

opportunity to witness a variety of theatrical experiences, as
well as hear professional artists speak as guest lecturers.
Theatre majors and minors from Vanderbilt have entered
a wide variety of professions and post-graduate opportunities
after they graduate. Those seeking employment in the fields
of theatre, film, radio, or television have secured positions at
appropriate graduate schools or internships with professional
companies immediately following their study at Vanderbilt.
Many distinguished professional theatre companies across the
nation, television networks in New York, and the film industry
in Los Angeles include Vanderbilt University Theatre alumni
as writers, actors, designers, technicians, dramaturgs, and stage
managers. In addition, many Vanderbilt theatre students have
secured teaching assignments at either the college/university
level (once they have completed appropriate post-graduate
education) or the elementary/secondary education level.
The practice of theatre requires individuals to participate
through a variety of means: to collaborate with all other members
of a production team; to express elements of abstract thought in
both oral and written form; and to develop the critical ability to
assess and analyze aesthetic choices. As a result of these experiences, recent graduates have also pursued careers in such widely
diverse fields as law, medicine, psychology, and business.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Theatre
Students majoring in theatre are required to complete a
minimum of 35 credit hours in courses concerned exclusively
with theatre and dramatic literature. Required courses are
1010/1010W or 1111, 1711, 1611 2651, and 4961; two courses chosen
from 2201, 2202W, 2204, and 4201; one course chosen from
3721, 3761, and 3741; additional 9 credit hours chosen from other
theatre courses above the 2000 level.

Honors Program
The Honors Program in Theatre is designed to afford superior
students the opportunity to pursue more intensive work within
their major field. Admission requirements are: (1) completion
of junior year; (2) completion of at least 21 credit hours of the
theatre major; (3) 3.3 minimum cumulative GPA and a 3.5
minimum GPA in courses counting toward the major. Candidates who successfully complete the following requirements
may graduate with honors or highest honors: (1) maintain the
aforementioned GPA throughout the senior year; (2) complete
all requirements of the theatre major; (3) complete 6 credit
hours of independent research 4998–4999 (Honors Research
and Thesis) normally taken during the senior year; (4) write
an honors thesis to be completed by the second semester of the
senior year; (5) successfully complete an honors oral examination on the topic of the thesis.

vanderbilt university

Minor in Theatre
A minor in theatre requires a minimum of 18 credit hours of
courses in the department. All students minoring in theatre
must complete 1010/1010W or 1111 and 4201. In addition, each
student must complete one of the following three clusters: Dramatic Literature/Theatre History: 2201, 2202W, 2204, and 3201W;
Acting/Directing: 1611, 3611, 4611, and 2651; Design/Technology:
1711 is required; choose three from 3721, 3761, 3741, or 3781.
Course descriptions begin on page 218.

Women’s and Gender Studies
DIRECTOR Katherine B. Crawford
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR Karen Allison Hammer
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Karen Allison Hammer
PROFESSOR EMERITA Charlotte Pierce-Baker
PROFESSORS Dana Nelson, Kelly Oliver
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURER Julia A. Fesmire
SENIOR LECTURERS Karen Allison Hammer, Stacy Simplican, and
Mary Zaborskis
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Brooke A. Ackerly (Political Science), Houston A. Baker
(English), Robert F. Campany (Asian Studies), Ellen W. Clayton
(Pediatrics, Law), Katherine B. Crawford (History), Cynthia J. Cyrus
(Blair), Colin Dayan (English), Bonnie J. Dow (Communication Studies),
Lynn E. Enterline (English), Earl E. Fitz (Portuguese), Vivien G. Fryd
(History of Art), Tracey E. George (Law), Barbara Hahn (German), Joni
L. Hersch (Law), Vera M. Kutzinski (English), Amy-Jill Levine (New
Testament Studies), Leah S. Marcus (English), Jonathan M. Metzl
(Medicine, Health, and Society), Holly J. McCammon (Sociology),
Thomas A. McGinn (History), Bonnie J. Miller-McLemore (Religion,
Psychology, and Culture), Lynn T. Ramey (French), Mark L. Schoenfield
(English), Kathryn Schwarz (English), Virginia M. Scott (French and
Italian), Laurel C. Schneider (Religious Studies), Tracy D. SharpleyWhiting (African American and Diaspora Studies, French), John M.
Sloop (Communication Studies), Hortense J. Spillers (English), Cecelia
Tichi (English), Benigno L. Trigo (Spanish and Portuguese), Arleen
M. Tuchman (History), Holly A. Tucker (French and Italian, Edward N.
Wright-Rios (History)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Ellen T. Armour (Theology), Vanessa B.
Beasley (Communication Studies), Laura M. Carpenter (Sociology),
Beth A. Conklin (Anthropology), Nathalie A. Debrauwere-Miller (French
and Italian), Idit Dobbs-Weinstein (Philosophy), Christin Essin (Theatre),
Jennifer Fay (Cinema and Media Arts), Kathy L. Gaca (Classical and
Mediterranean Studies), Teresa A. Goddu (English), Derek M. Griffith
(Medicine, Health, and Society), Sarah E. Igo (History), Christina
Karageorgou-Bastea (Spanish and Portuguese), Shaul J. Kelner
(Sociology, Jewish Studies), Claire S. King (Communication Studies),
Melanie D. Lowe (Blair), Richard J. McGregor (Religious Studies),
Adam S. Meyer (Jewish Studies), Catherine A. Molineux (History),
Ifeoma C. Nwankwo (English), Emanuelle Oliveira-Monte (Spanish
and Portuguese), Bridget E. Orr (English), Richard N. Pitt (Sociology),
Nancy B. Reisman (English), Ruth Rogaski (History), Allison H.
Schachter (Jewish Studies), C. Melissa Snarr (Ethics and Society),
Meike G. Werner (German, Russian and East European Studies)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Candice Amich (English), Gilbert Gonzales
(Health Policy), Aimi Hamraie (Medicine, Health, and Society), Jessica
Hock (English), Rolanda L. Johnson (Nursing), Mireille M. Lee (History
of Art), Luis Leyva (Math Education), Linda G. Manning (Psychiatry), N.
Michelle Murray (Spanish and Portuguese), Kimberly Welch (History)

College of Arts and Science / Women’s and Gender Studies
SENIOR LECTURERS Yollette T. Jones (History), Elizabeth S. Meadows
(English), Courtney S. Muse (Medicine, Health, and Society), Elena
Olazagasti-Segovia (Spanish), Alexandra A. Sargent (Theatre)
LECTURERS Sophie Bjork-James (Anthropology), Elizabeth R.
Covington (English), Jeremy DeWaal (History), Amanda M. Kinard
(English), Nancy M. Roche (English), Terrie Spetalnick (Sociology)
WRITER IN RESIDENCE Alice Randall (African American and Diaspora
Studies)

WOMEN’S and Gender Studies is an interdisciplinary program
that examines gender as a social construct and as a historically
variable component of culture that orders human behavior,
perceptions, and values. The program teaches its students to
reexamine traditional beliefs, to engage in new kinds of research,
and to bring a critical perspective to the everyday practices
that shape women’s and men’s lives in the United States and
globally. Our courses and instructors pay particular attention
to the consequences for women, men, and children of living in
a world characterized by profound inequalities. The program
also recognizes that race, class, ethnicity, age, sexuality, ability,
and nationality are crucial aspects of identity and experience;
these are understood to be intersecting and contested features of
social life and are examined as such.
Because these aforementioned features of human experience cut across many disciplines, students in the Program in
Women’s and Gender Studies achieve a deeper understanding of
the complexity and wholeness of human life. In the classroom,
as in faculty and student research, our goal is to transform
traditional ways of knowing by reaching across epistemological
and methodological divisions to foster comprehensive, interdisciplinary perspectives on gender, sexuality, identity, and power
in social life. Women’s and gender studies not only compels us to
recognize the problems and possibilities of the changing times
in which we live, but also empowers us to effect change.
The Women’s and Gender Studies program offers a major
and a minor which provide an excellent foundation for students
who plan to enter professional schools in law, medicine, and
business; for those who pursue advanced degrees in women’s
and gender studies, the humanities, and social sciences; as well
as for those who move into careers in business, government,
research, teaching, health and social administration, counseling,
journalism, advocacy, and the media.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Program of Concentration in Women’s and Gender Studies
The interdisciplinary major in women’s and gender studies consists of 36 credit hours of course work, distributed as
follows:
1. Core courses. Either 1150 (or 1150W) or 1160, 3201, and
either 3246W or 3250 (or 3250W). (9 credit hours)
2. Senior Seminar. 4960. Generally taken in the second
semester of the student’s final year. (3 credit hours)
3. 24 credit hours of electives. Any courses in the Women’s
and Gender Studies program; any courses dual-listed in Women’s and Gender Studies; any course that meets the approval of
the director of undergraduate studies and is not used to satisfy
the above requirements. These elective courses may include up
to 6 credit hours of internship and/or independent research
(3882, 3883).

139

Honors Program
The Honors Program in Women’s and Gender Studies requires
36 credit hours of course work and is designed to afford
exceptional students the opportunity to undertake independent research on a topic in feminist and/or gender scholarship
in consultation with faculty members. The program is open
to all women’s and gender studies majors with junior standing
who have completed at least 24 credit hours of the major and
who have earned a 3.3 cumulative grade point average and a 3.3
grade point average in courses counting toward the women’s
and gender studies major. Students must be approved for
acceptance into the Honors Program by the program director. To graduate with honors in women’s and gender studies,
students must:
(a) Complete 36 credit hours of course work;
(b) Complete the required courses for the major (described
above);
(c) Submit for approval a short description of the Honors
project/thesis to the director of the Women’s and Gender Studies program, no later than second semester of the junior year;
(d) Complete 6 credit hours of independent research, 4998
and 4999 (Honors Research and Project), typically during the
senior year under supervision of the project adviser. These 6
credit hours count as electives in the 36 credit hours of course
work for Honors majors.
(e) Complete an honors project by the second semester of
the senior year; and
(f) Pass an oral examination on the topic of the Honors
project/thesis.
Candidates for honors in women’s and gender studies may,
with the written permission of the director of the program, substitute one 3000-level course in gender and/or feminist studies
for one 2000-level course required for the major.
Information concerning the Honors Program is available
from the director of the Women’s and Gender Studies program.
College regulations governing honors may be found in this
catalog under Honors Programs.

Minor in Women’s and Gender Studies
The minor in women’s and gender studies consists of 18 credit
hours of course work, distributed as follows:
1. Core courses. Either 1150 (or 1150W) or 1160, 3201, and
either 3246W or 3250 (or 3250W). (9 credit hours)
2. Senior Seminar. 4960. Generally taken in the second
semester of the student’s final year. (3 credit hours)
3. At least 6 credit hours of electives. Any courses in the
Women’s and Gender Studies program; any courses dual-listed
in Women’s and Gender Studies; any course that meets the
approval of the director of undergraduate studies, and is not
used to satisfy the above requirements.

Recommended courses organized by subject area are as
follows.
*Note: 1111 First-Year Writing Seminars and Special Topics
courses vary each semester. For full descriptions of current
seminar offerings and information on whether a particular
First-Year Writing Seminar can be used to fulfill requirements
for the women’s and gender studies major or minor, consult
the program director.

A&S

140

vanderbilt university

AFRICAN AMERICAN AND DIASPORA STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing
Seminar*; 1204, Diaspora Feminisms; 2204, Politics of Beauty and Blacks;
3214, Black Masculinity: Social Imagery and Public Policy; 4264, Black
Diaspora Women Writers.

JEWISH STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar*.

ANTHROPOLOGY: 2105, Race in the Americas; 3121, Global Wealth and
Poverty; 2342, Biology of Inequality; 2110, Gender and Cultural Politics.

MEDICINE, HEALTH, AND SOCIETY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar*;
1930, Health Social Movements; 1940, Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities; 2230, Masculinity and Men’s Health; 2240, Bionic Bodies, Disability
Cultures; 2250, War and the Body; 3890, Special Topics*.

CLASSICAL STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar*; 3100, Women,
Sexuality, and the Family in Ancient Greece and Rome.
COMMUNICATION STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar*; 2950,
Rhetoric of Mass Media; 3100, Rhetoric of Social Movements; 3110,
Women, Rhetoric, and Social Change; 3720, Communicating Gender;
3890, Selected Topics in Communication Studies*.
ENGLISH: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar*; 1230W, Literature and
Analytical Thinking*; 1260W, Introduction to Literary and Cultural Analysis*; 3622, Nineteenth-Century American Women Writers; 3670, 3670W,
Colonial and Post-Colonial Literature*; 3674, Caribbean Literature; 3742,
Feminist Theory; 3890, 3890W, Movements in Literature*; 3894, 3894W,
Major Figures in Literature*; 3898, 3898W, Special Topics in English and
American Literature*.
FRENCH: 3230, French and Francophone Cinema; 4320, French Feminist Thought: Literary and Critical; 4322, Adultery and Transgressions in
Literature.
GERMAN: 2444, German Fairy Tales: From Brothers Grimm to Walt Disney;
3344, Women at the Margins: German-Jewish Writers; 4535, German Romanticism; 4537, Women and Modernity.
HISTORY: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar*; 2810, Women, Health, and
Sexuality; 2835, Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition to 1700;
2840, Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition since 1700; 3010,
Pornography and Prostitution in History; 4960, Majors Seminar*.
HISTORY OF ART: 2765, Art since 1945; 3228W, Gender and Sexuality in
Greek Art; 3840, Directed Study*; 4960, Advanced Seminar*.
ITALIAN: 3340, Famous Women by Boccaccio.

LATINO AND LATINA STUDIES: 2101, Introduction to Latino and Latina
Studies.

PHILOSOPHY: 3604, Gender and Sexuality; 3007, French Feminism.
POLITICAL SCIENCE: 2209, Issues in Political Theory; 2236, The Politics
of Global Inequality; 3264W, Global Feminisms; 3271, Feminist Theory and
Research; 3893, Selected Topics in American Government*.
PSYCHOLOGY: 3705, Human Sexuality.
RELIGIOUS STUDIES: 1111, First-Year Writing Seminar; 1820, Religion,
Sexuality, and Power; 3225, Sexuality in the Hebrew Bible and the Ancient
Near East; 3926, Ancient Goddesses; 3930, Women and Religion; 4554,
The Qur’an and Its Interpreters; 4834, Post-Freudian Theories and Religion;
4938, Marriage in the Ancient Near East and the Hebrew Bible.
RUSSIAN: 1874, Russian Fairy Tales.
SOCIOLOGY: 3221, The Family; 3304, Race, Gender, and Health; 3603,
Women and Social Activism; 3604, American Social Movements; 3611,
Women and the Law; 3616, Women and Public Policy in America; 3702,
Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the United States; 3704, Race, Gender, and
Sport; 3711, Women, Gender, and Globalization; 3722, Gender in Society;
3723, Gender, Sexuality, and the Body; 3724, Gender Identities, Interactions, and Relationships.
SPANISH: 3893, Special Topics in Hispanic Literature*; 4755, Latin and
Latin American Women Writers.
THEATRE: 2781, The History of Fashion: Sex and Propaganda; 3741, Elements of Basic Design: Costuming and Makeup.
Course descriptions begin on page 219.

College of Arts and Science / Courses

141

College of Arts and Science Courses
Explanation of Course Numbers and Symbols
1000-level courses are introductory courses primarily taken by
freshmen and sophomores.
2000- and higher-level courses are intermediate- or advanced-level
courses which typically require some prerequisite. They are primarily
intended for sophomores, juniors, and seniors.
Hours are semester hours—e.g., a three-hour course carries credit of
three semester hours.
Bracketed figures indicate semester hours credit, e.g., [3].
First-Year Writing Seminars are numbered 1111.
W symbols used in course numbers designate courses in the College of
Arts and Science that will meet the AXLE writing requirement.
The AXLE designation in parentheses in each course description indicates which AXLE requirement pertains. For example, (HCA) indicates
credit for Humanities and the Creative Arts in AXLE. The designation (No AXLE credit) indicates the course does not satisfy an AXLE
degree requirement.
The university reserves the right to change the arrangement or content of
courses, to change the texts and other materials used, or to cancel any
course on the basis of insufficient enrollment or for any other reason.
It is the responsibility of each student to avoid duplication, in whole or in
part, of the content of any courses offered toward the degree. Such duplication may result in withdrawal of credit.

African American and Diaspora Studies
AADS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly AADS 99] Topics vary. Open
only to first-year students. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)
AADS 1010. Introduction to African American and Diaspora Studies. [Formerly AADS 101] Foundations of African American culture from
ancient African history and through contemporary issues in the African
American experience and the larger diaspora. The characteristics, developments, and dynamics of diaspora culture in the Americas, with a particular focus on the United States. [3] (P)
AADS 1016. Race Matters. [Formerly AADS 110] Race and racism in
the United States and their impact on democratic practices. General intellectual and cultural manifestations of the significance of race and how
it influences democratic reform: racial preferences, the prison industrial
complex, national security, HIV/AIDS, and elections. [3] (US)
AADS 1108. Making of the African Diaspora. [Formerly AADS 102]
1790 to the mid-twentieth century. Slave politics and abolition, the meaning of freedom after emancipation, and black workers’ struggle for democracy and citizenship. Resistance to empire and colonialism. Migration,
race and color ideology, religion, and culture. [3] (P)
AADS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly AADS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
AADS 1204. Diaspora Feminisms. [Formerly AADS 120] Introduction
to feminism in multiple diasporic places and communities. Comparison of
black feminisms across time and space. [3] (INT)

AADS 1506. Reel to Real: Film Aesthetics and Representation. [Formerly AADS 150] Oppositional cinematic practices of black filmmakers.
Hollywood representations of blacks. The theoretical language of film criticism, styles, genres, periods. [3] (P)
AADS 1706. Capoeira: Afro-Brazilian Race, Culture, and Expression. [Formerly AADS 170] Origins of an Afro-Brazilian martial art form.
Influence on Brazilian and world culture in the areas of religion, dance, and
music. Development as a social protest movement. Intersections of race,
gender, class, power, and national identity. [3] (INT)
AADS 2104. Popular Culture and Black Sexual Politics. [Formerly
AADS 200] Constructed images of black masculinity, femininity, and sexuality in popular culture. Social political hierarchies in society at-large. [3]
(HCA)
AADS 2106. African Diaspora: A Problem for Thought. Beginning
with the slave trade in Europe to the formation of slave colonies in the
Americas. Meaning of diaspora for African subjects in the 18th-19th centuries, and challenges to racism and colonialism in the African Diaspora in
the 20th century. [3] (P)
AADS 2148. Blacks in Latin America and the Caribbean. [Formerly
AADS 140] Distinctive cultural forms and patterns in the Caribbean basin and Latin America from the sixteenth century to the present. Diverse
origins of culture. Slave society’s impact on cultural production. [3] (INT)
AADS 2166. African American Influences on Country Music. African
and African American aesthetics, instruments, and people. Southern rural
folk music in the United States. [3] (US)
AADS 2168. Black Migrations in the African Diaspora. [Formerly
AADS 160] The impact of migration in a post-civil rights and post-colonial
world. Political tensions, identity politics, and solidarity. Comparative anthropological and sociological narratives on race, culture, and ethnicity.
Countries and regions include Democratic Republic of Congo, France,
Ghana, Liberia, Tanzania, parts of Asia, and the U.S. [3] (INT)
AADS 2178. Global Africa. [Formerly AADS 165] The globalization of
Africa within the context of Arab and European expansion. Historical flashpoints and contemporary events. The invention of Africa in literary and political discourses. The geopolitics of aid and development. Africa’s relationship with the African diaspora, including modern migrations and debates
on the racial and geographic divide between Arab regions north and south
of the Sahara. [3] (INT)
AADS 2204. Black Women and the Politics of Blackness and Beauty. [Formerly AADS 207] Competing and contested meanings of beauty
and race in the post-black society. The role of traditional and new media in
self-expressions and self-understandings of color, body image, hair, and
relationships. [3] (HCA)
AADS 2214. History and Myth: Black Women in the United States.
[Formerly AADS 221] Complexities of being black and female in the history
of the United States. Interrogation of racism, class, sexuality, and sexism.
Black women’s multifaceted, diverse community roles. [3] (HCA)
AADS 2294. Black Paris – Paris Noir: The African Diaspora and the
City of Light. [Formerly AADS 209] The lived experiences, tensions, belonging, and representations of people of African descent who self-identify
and are identified as Black or Noir in Paris, France, from the interwar years
to the present. Diversity, intergroup relations, and race beyond the United
States. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1111 section 5.
[3] (INT)
AADS 2306. Race, Mixed Race, and “Passing.” [Formerly AADS 230]
Social, legal constructions and live experiences of race. Phenomenon of
“passing” and category of “mixed race” in fiction, film, and land-mark court
cases. [3] (HCA)
AADS 2356. African Spirits in Exile: Diaspora Religions in the Americas. Use of anthropology, folklore, history, and literature to examine the

A&S

142

vanderbilt university

history of Haitian Vodun, Cuban Santeria, Brazilian Candomblé, New Orleans Voodoo, and Trinidadian Orisha worship. Comparisons with Black
Christian traditions and supernatural beliefs beyond organized religion. [3]
(P)

AADS 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly AADS 289] May be repeated
for a total of 6 credits, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of
AADS 3850] (No AXLE credit)

AADS 2654. Memoirs and Biographies. [Formerly AADS 265] Biographies and autobiographies as lenses for the study of historical trends and
events; development of gender, sexual, and racial identities in subjects.
[3] (US)

AADS 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly AADS 280b] Graded on a
Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. These
hours may not be included in the minimum number of hours required for
the African American and Diaspora studies major. Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of
public and private institutions on issues relative to the black experience.
A minimum of 3 hours of background reading and research will be completed in AADS 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the numbers
of hours taken in internship training in 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point
average, 6 hours of prior work in AADS, and prior approval by the director of Undergraduate Studies in African American and Diaspora Studies
of the student’s plan are required. A research paper and report must be
submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training
is completed. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit)

AADS 2698. African Diaspora Ethnography. [Formerly AADS 269] Anthropology and the construction of race and blackness. Ethnography as
method. Notions of roots and routes in the making of African diaspora
culture. [3] (INT)
AADS 3016. GOAT: Life, Times, and Politics of Muhammad Ali. “The
Greatest Of All Time” (GOAT)—Muhammad Ali—and his impact on U.S.
sports history, U.S. political culture, global black freedom struggles, and
engagement with the Nation of Islam. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]
(US)
AADS 3104W. Soul Food as Text in Text: An Examination of African American Foodways. [Formerly AADS 208W] Distinctions between
Southern food and soul food. Soul food as performance and projection
of gender and racial identity. Cookbooks as literary artifacts. Soul food in
American popular culture, and in African American, Southern, and women’s writing. Soul food and community formation. Serves as repeat credit
for students who have completed 265W and for students who completed
ENGL 288W in fall 2010. [3] (HCA)
AADS 3178. Colonialism and After. [Formerly AADS 220] African and
Caribbean cultures of colonialism. Forms of decolonization and the predicament of neocolonialism from the emergence of capitalism to the present.
The historical and anthropological projects of empire and race-making.
Causes and strategies of expansion. Forms of representation and knowledge production. Discourses around intimacy, illness and hygiene. Practices of coercion and violence. [3] (INT)
AADS 3204W. African American Children’s Literature. [Formerly
AADS 204W] From the seventeenth century to the present. Oral and written; fiction and non-fiction. Major works, writers, and genres. No credit for
students who earned credit for 294a section 1 in spring 2011. [3] (HCA)
AADS 3206. Mystery, Murder, and Mayhem in Black Detective Fiction. [Formerly AADS 202] Detective fiction in America, beginning with
Edgar Allan Poe, the founder of the genre in the American literary tradition,
and continuing on with such black writers as Chester Himes, Walter Mosley, Paula Wood, and Pamela Thomas-Graham. [3] (HCA)
AADS 3208W. Blacks in the Military. [Formerly AADS 203W] Black participation in American and other wars, from the Revolutionary and Civil
wars to ongoing global conflicts. Issues of democracy and freedom. Thematic explorations through film. [3] (P)
AADS 3214. Black Masculinity: Social Imagery and Public Policy.
[Formerly AADS 210] Historical and contemporary debates, perceptions,
and attitudes. Public policy debates surrounding disparate incarceration
rates and sentencing, policing, racial profiling. Social imagery, “down low”
homosexuality, criminality, hypersexuality, and athleticism. [3] (SBS)
AADS 3248. Atlantic African Slave Trade. [Formerly AADS 145] Cultural, economic, and social aspects of the African slave trade into the Americas from the 16th to 19th centuries. Transformation of the slave trade as
a result of abolition and suppression. [3] (SBS)
AADS 3258. Black Issues in Education. [Formerly AADS 215] Race,
ethnicity, gender, class and their relationships to both the broader roles
of schooling and education in American society. Historical foundation of
education for African Americans, educational and socioeconomic inequality, family structures, and social policy initiatives. [3] (SBS)
AADS 3278. Black Europe. [Formerly AADS 275] History and politics
of the African Diaspora in Europe. Focus on Britain, France, Germany,
the Netherlands, and Scandinavia. European Union debates about social
exclusion; race in the European context. [3] (INT)

AADS 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly AADS
280a] Readings conducted under the supervision of a member of the African American and Diaspora Studies program and a substantial research
paper are required. Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline
can gain experience in a broad range of public and private institutions on
issues relative to the black experience. A minimum of 3 hours of background reading and research will be completed in AADS 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the numbers of hours taken in internship
training in 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior
work in AADS, and prior approval by the director of Undergraduate Studies in African American and Diaspora Studies of the student’s plan are
required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the
semester during which the internship training is completed. Corequisite:
3880. [Variable credit: 3-6] (No AXLE credit)
AADS 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly AADS 294A] May be repeated
for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may
enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE
credit)
AADS 4198. Global Anti-Blackness and Black Power. [Formerly
AADS 190] The relationship and relevance of Black Power to anti-blackness in the United States and globally. The systemic marginalization and
exclusion of blacks in public life. Their resilience against and resistance to
those efforts. [3] (INT)
AADS 4228W. Black Girlhood: History, Performance and CounterNarratives. Historical and current social, political, and cultural constructions of black girlhood in the United States. Performances in which black
girls engage to deconstruct and interrupt these constructions via scholarly
works, poetry, film, photography, and novels. [3] (SBS)
AADS 4256. Haiti: Freedom and Democracy. [Formerly AADS 205] The
Saint-Domingue Revolution from 1791 to 1803 and the development of
Haiti from 1804 to the present. Haiti in global context; the revolution as
a key moment in the Age of Revolution and the formation of the Black
International. Historical monographs, novels, poetry, visual culture, and
music. [3] (INT)
AADS 4264. Black Diaspora Women Writers. [Formerly AADS 260]
Comparative fiction by women from Francophone and Anglophone Africa,
the Caribbean, and the United States. Novels of awakening (bildungsroman), themes of exile, home and alienation, identity as well as sexuality,
class and color, slavery and colonialism. [3] (HCA)
AADS 4270. Research Methods. [Formerly AADS 270] Collection, management, analysis and interpretation of data for research. Introduction to
qualitative computer software programs. [3] (SBS)
AADS 4506. Slavery and Public Memory. [Formerly AADS 240] Systems of African enslavement in the Americas as a subject of debate
among popular and academic audiences. Memoirs, oral history, genealogy, literature, film, and other creative production. Public commemoration
and tourist-related slavery observances around the diaspora. [3] (SBS)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
AADS 4979. Senior Thesis in African American and Diaspora Studies. [Formerly AADS 299] Senior Thesis in African American and Diaspora
Studies. Supervised readings and independent research to produce an
interdisciplinary research paper; topic to be selected in conjunction with a
faculty member of African American and Diaspora Studies. Open only to
seniors. [3] (No AXLE credit)
AADS 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly AADS 298] Supervised
readings and independent research for honors thesis under supervision
of the adviser and another faculty member. Open only to seniors in the
Honors Program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

American Studies
AMER 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly AMER 99] Topics vary.
General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)
AMER 1002. Introduction to American Studies. [Formerly AMER 100]
An interdisciplinary approach to American culture, character, and life. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002W. [3] (US)
AMER 1002W. Introduction to American Studies. [Formerly AMER
100W] An interdisciplinary approach to American culture, character, and
life. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002. [3] (US)
AMER 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly AMER 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
AMER 1200. Introduction to Southern Studies. [Formerly AMER 101]
An interdisciplinary approach to southern American culture, character, and
life approached from the interrelated perspectives of history and culture
(literature, music, religion, images, rituals, material culture). [3] (US)
AMER 2100. Sports, Culture, and Society. Multifaceted role of sports in
culture and society, past and present. Cross-cultural perspectives on U.S.
sports and related practices. [3] (SBS)
AMER 3200. Global Perspectives on the U.S. [Formerly AMER 202]
Contemporary and historical views of the U.S. political and cultural presence in the world; comparative nationalisms; emphasis on points of view
outside the U.S. [3] (US)
AMER 3830. Serving and Learning. [Formerly AMER 201] Meanings of
and motives behind community service in the United States. The process
of engagement in meaningful service. Challenges in integrating service
with academic coursework. A service-learning course. [3] (P)
AMER 3851. Independent Readings and Research. [Formerly AMER
289A] Independent readings and/or research on approved topics relating
to American society and culture. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in
3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students
may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum
of 6 credits total for all semesters of AMER 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE
credit)
AMER 3852. Independent Readings and Research. [Formerly AMER
289B] Independent readings and/or research on approved topics relating
to American society and culture. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in
3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students
may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum
of 6 credits total for all semesters of AMER 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE
credit)
AMER 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly AMER 280B] Offered on
a pass/fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Under
faculty supervision, students intern in public or private organizations, conduct background research and reading, and submit a research paper at
the end of the semester during which the internship training is complete.
Background reading and research will be completed in 3881 concurrently

143
with the completion of internship training, 3880; a minimum of 3 hours of
3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-6] (No AXLE credit)
AMER 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly AMER
280A] Under faculty supervision, students intern in public or private organizations, conduct background research and reading, and submit a
research paper at the end of the semester during which the internship
training is completed. Background reading and research will be completed
in 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, 3880; a
minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours
taken in 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3-6]. (No AXLE credit)
AMER 3890. Topics in American Studies. [Formerly AMER 240] Topics
vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3] (SBS)
AMER 4000. The American Studies Workshop. [Formerly AMER 294]
Issues, methodologies, traditions, approaches, and problems in the discipline. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference given to majors and
minors. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course
each semester. [3] (HCA)
AMER 4100. Undergraduate Seminar in American Studies. [Formerly
AMER 295] Advanced reading, research, and writing in a particular area
of American Studies. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference given
to American Studies majors. May be repeated for credit once if there is no
duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course each semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of
AMER 4100] (SBS)
AMER 4960. Senior Project. [Formerly AMER 297] A project conceived,
developed, and completed under supervision of the American Studies
faculty. Normally open only to senior American Studies majors. [3] (SBS)
AMER 4998. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly AMER 298] Acquisition, reading, and analysis of primary source research material. Open only
to senior honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)
AMER 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly AMER 299] Writing an
honors thesis under the supervision of the thesis adviser. [3] (No AXLE
credit)

Anthropology
ANTH 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ANTH 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ANTH 1101. Introduction to Anthropology. [Formerly ANTH 101] The
study of diverse cultures in the contemporary world. The ways in which
cultures have developed and changed. Intended for students with a general interest in the field of anthropology. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly ANTH 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
ANTH 1130W. America through the Lens of Disney. Concepts of gender, family, race, and class through a combination of texts and animated
films produced by the Walt Disney Company. Impact on contemporary
American cultural values. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 1111 section 07. [3] (P)
ANTH 1201. Introduction to Archaeology. [Formerly ANTH 104] Archaeological interpretation of global human history from early settled villages through the rise of the first civilizations. Archaeological methods and
analysis, interpretive controversies, and cultural heritage. Environment,
technology, religion, and human diversity in past cultural transformations.

A&S

144

vanderbilt university

Rise of early cities and states. Repeat credit for students who earned
credit for 1201W. [3] (SBS)

interpretation are explored through lectures, case studies, and problem
assignments. [3] (SBS)

ANTH 1201W. Introduction to Archaeology. Archaeological interpretation of global human history from early settled villages through the rise
of the first civilizations. Archaeological methods and analysis, interpretive
controversies, and cultural heritage. Environment, technology, religion,
and human diversity in past cultural transformations. Rise of early cities
and states. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 1201. [3]
(SBS)

ANTH 2214. Art and Architecture in the Ancient Americas. [Formerly
ANTH 257] Visual arts and built environments in Mesoamerican and South
American civilizations before European contact. Sacred, cultural, and historical influences on building traditions and iconography. [3] (INT)

ANTH 1301. Introduction to Biological Anthropology. [Formerly ANTH
103] Natural selection and evolution of primates and humans. Theories on
early human lifeways and behavior. Bioarchaeological and bioanthropological studies of past and present human health and disease. Evaluation
of fossil, skeletal, molecular, and artifactual evidence in reconstructing the
past. [3] (MNS)

ANTH 2220. Human Landscapes. [Formerly ANTH 282] Human-environment interactions in the formation of landscapes and settlement systems. Uses of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and cross-cultural comparison to understand social space, sacred landscapes, urban plans, and
historical ecology. Methods of interpretation through quantitative, social,
and symbolic analysis. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for
2220W. [3] (SBS)

ANTH 1601. Introduction to Language and Culture. [Formerly ANTH
105] The interrelationship between language and culture. Language and
thought, language ideologies, discourse, and linguistic and social identities. Culture and language change. [3] (SBS)

ANTH 2220W. Human Landscapes. Human-environment interactions
in the formation of landscapes and settlement systems. Uses of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and cross-cultural comparison to understand
social space, sacred landscapes, urban plans, and historical ecology.
Methods of interpretation through quantitative, social, and symbolic analysis. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 2220. [3] (SBS)

ANTH 2105. Race in the Americas. [Formerly ANTH 205] Origins of
the concept of race. Comparison of past and present racial ideologies
and practices in the United States, Latin America, and the Caribbean. The
intersection of race with gender, ethnicity, class, nationalism, and colonialism. [3] (P)

ANTH 2221. Old World Archaeology. [Formerly ANTH 217] Ancient Cultures of the Old World. Archaeology of the Near East, Africa, Asia, and
Oceania. The origins of the great civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia.
The beginnings of cities, agriculture, trade, and empires in light of recent
archaeological discoveries. [3] (INT)

ANTH 2106. Culture and Power in Latin America. [Formerly ANTH
210] Survey of native cultures and Spanish and Portuguese heritage. Fundamental traditions, including marriage and the family, the relationship
between men and women, racial and ethnic identity, social class, and religion. Peasant communities and contemporary urban life. [3] (INT)

ANTH 2222. North American Archaeology. [Formerly ANTH 229] The
origins of native North American culture. Migration from Asia, early hunters and gatherers, and the extinction of ancient fauna. Evolution of social
complexity, ecological adaptations, and prehistoric interaction as seen in
the archaeological record of the continent. [3] (US)

ANTH 2108. Indigenous Peoples of Lowland South America. [Formerly ANTH 249] Native societies of Amazonia, the Orinoco basin, and
other forest, savanna, and coastal regions of South America. Ecology,
cosmology, social organization, and political relations in historical and contemporary populations. Government policies, human rights, environmentalism, sustainable development, and indigenous activism and advocacy.
[3] (SBS)

ANTH 2223. Native North Americans. [Formerly ANTH 214] Indian societies of North America; their archaeological origins, development, and
changing adaptation to white society. [3] (US)

ANTH 2109. Food Politics in America. [Formerly ANTH 208] The cultural, social, political, and economic contexts of the contemporary food
system. Issues of health and nutrition. Land use, ecological relations, food
chains, and links to climate change. Ethics of food production, distribution,
and consumption. Agricultural policy, immigration, work conditions, animal
welfare, and local economies. Roles of citizens and consumers. Rise of
movements seeking sustainable alternatives. [3] (US)
ANTH 2110. Gender and Cultural Politics. [Formerly ANTH 266] Crosscultural comparison of women’s roles and status in western and nonWestern societies. Role of myths, symbols, and rituals in the formation
of gender identities and the politics of sexual cooperation, conflict, and
inequality. Case studies from Africa, the Middle East, Europe, North and
South America, Asia, and Melanesia. [3] (P)
ANTH 2113W. Food, Identity, and Culture. Food in Western and nonWestern cultures. Food, power, and the making of social beings. Taboos,
cultural preferences, and sensory perceptions. Role of eating in social
categories, boundaries, and the creation of self and other. Food fashion,
globalization, and food in the media.[3] (INT)
ANTH 2150. Urban Ecology. Environmental conditions and consequences of human and non-human life processes in cities through history. Transformations of landscapes, food systems, social inequality, and
built environments. Origins of cities, gentrification, urban planning, green
activism, and environmental justice. Long-term perspectives on climate
change, political ecology, environmental history, green politics, and prospects for sustainability. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 2211. Archaeology. [Formerly ANTH 211] An introduction to the
methods used by archaeologists to study the nature and development
of prehistoric societies. Approaches to survey, excavation, analysis, and

ANTH 2227. Food in the Ancient World. Development of agriculture
from around 8,000 BCE to the contact between Old and New Worlds in
1492. Role of foodways in human societies and impact on historical and
environmental change. Integration of foodways with social and cultural
systems such as gender, identity, ideology, and trade. Elements of historical cuisines, including cooking techniques, meat, and alcohol. Excursions
to local sites of agricultural, archaeological, and food-related relevance.
[3] (SBS)
ANTH 2230. South American Archaeology. [Formerly ANTH 252] From
12,000 years ago to the present. Archaeology, ethnohistory, and ethnography. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 2231. Ancient Andean Civilizations. [Formerly ANTH 248] Introduction to the archaeology and peoples of ancient South America. Early
hunters and gatherers, origins of agriculture and urbanism, and the rise
and fall of the Huari and Inca empires. [3] (INT)
ANTH 2242. The Archaeology of Ancient Maya Civilization. [Formerly
ANTH 213] Case study in cultural evolution. Archaeological evidence and
social theory on the enigmatic origins, complex nature, and sudden collapse of the ancient Maya civilization. Repeat credit for students who have
earned credit for 2242W. [3] (INT)
ANTH 2242W. The Archaeology of Ancient Maya Civilization. Case
study in cultural evolution. Archaeological evidence of and social theory on
the enigmatic origins, complex nature, and sudden collapse of the ancient
Maya civilization. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for
2242. [3] (INT)
ANTH 2250. Contemporary Middle East and Kurdistan. From Ottoman and Safavid empires to Syria, Turkey, Iran, and Iraq. Kurds, Kurdish
history, and the Middle East. Nationalism, Kurdish ethnicity, and uprisings;
Kurdish politics across four nation-states. Kurdish community in Nashville.
[3] (INT)
ANTH 2342. Biology of Inequality. [Formerly ANTH 242] Biological and
health consequences of racial and social inequalities. Psychosocial stress

College of Arts and Science / Courses
and measurement of its health impact. Effects on disease and precursors
to disease. Measures of molecular biology, such as epigenetics and gene
expression. Biomarkers of inflammation, cardiometabolic health, and immune function. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 2370. Death and the Body. [Formerly ANTH 267] Cross-cultural
study of death rituals. Mortuary archaeology and anthropology of death
and the body. Biological and social perspectives on the corpse and living
body, and their treatment in ritual and everyday life. The body as biological specimen and social artifact. Nature of beauty, body modification, and
adornment. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 2375. Making Racism Visible: Media and Civil Rights from
MLK to Black Lives Matter. African American, American Indian, and
intersectional racial justice movements from 1950 to present. Role of mass
media, documentary film, and social media in political struggles for racial
justice in the United States. [3] (P)
ANTH 2601. Introduction to Linguistics. [Formerly ANTH 201] Systematic study and analysis of human language. Formation of language sounds,
sound systems, the structure of words, the structure of sentences, meaning, language change. Data from diverse languages of the world. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 2602. Anthropological Linguistics. [Formerly ANTH 203] An
introduction to the study of language in its anthropological context. Language and culture, the structure of symbolic systems, vocabulary as a
guide to the ways societies classify their universe. Linguistic analysis as a
tool for ethno-graphic investigation. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 2603. Comparative Writing Systems. [Formerly ANTH 219] The
origins, development, and social uses of writing in the ancient Middle East,
Mediterranean, and Mesoamerica. Decipherments of hieroglyphic systems. Literacy, historiography, and cross-cultural translation. [3] (HCA)
ANTH 3120. Sociocultural Field Methods. [Formerly ANTH 275] Research design and proposal writing, access to data, ethical issues, sampling techniques, interviewing questionnaire design and question writing,
data analysis. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3121. Global Wealth and Poverty. [Formerly ANTH 209] The production of inequality. How wealth is accumulated, lost, exchanged, and
displayed; how poverty is created, endured, and overcome. Explanations
in terms of luck, hard work, immorality, occult forces, and public policies.
Case studies. [3] (P)
ANTH 3122. The Anthropology of Globalization. [Formerly ANTH 232]
Perspectives on globalization based on ethnographic case studies. The
impact of new technologies on native cultures; different cultural meanings
of global commodities; creation of new diaspora cultures; effects of neoliberal reforms on local economies; ethnic movements and terror networks.
[3] (INT)
ANTH 3130. Andean Culture and Society. [Formerly ANTH 246] Historical and archaeological background, languages, economy, environment,
and cultural adaptation of Andean peoples. Spanish and native American
heritage. Religion, family structure, political organization, contemporary
social issues, and economic background. Urban and rural traditions, social movements, and change. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3132. Social Movements. [Formerly ANTH 225] Collective action,
past and present. Class- and identity-based movements, transnational
activism, and networks. The early U.S. labor movement; 1960s gay, women’s and civil rights movements. Global struggles for social justice. [3] (INT)
ANTH 3133. Political Anthropology. [Formerly ANTH 224] Comparative and ethnographic analysis of political and legal systems. Formal and
informal means of control in egalitarian and hierarchical societies. Anthropological theories of power, authority, influence, and leadership. Social
and cultural dimensions of conflict, consensus, competition, and dispute
resolution. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3134. Human Rights of Indigenous Peoples. [Formerly ANTH
227] Major concepts and legal frameworks for indigenous self-governance, cultural rights, and environmental stewardship. Local and transnational indigenous rights movements. [3] (P)

145
ANTH 3135. Development, Social Enterprise, Social Justice. Theories of economic and human development. Multidimensional approaches
to poverty and well-being. Roles of inequality, discrimination, and social
justice. Practical focus on social entrepreneurship in international context.
[3] (P)
ANTH 3138. Global Food Politics. Ecological, political, economic, and
cultural dynamics in the world food system. Historical and contemporary
agricultural methods. Energy, land use, and climate change. Public health
and nutrition. Hunger, food scarcity, and biotechnologies. Commodity
chains and labor conditions. Movements for food security, food sovereignty, fair trade, and consumer information. [3] (INT)
ANTH 3140. Myth, Ritual, Belief: The Anthropology of Religion. [Formerly ANTH 226] Cross-cultural survey of religious and ritual beliefs in light
of theories of religion. Topics include sacrifice, myth, witchcraft, divination,
religious change, and millenarian movements. [3] (HCA)
ANTH 3141. Anthropology of Healing. [Formerly ANTH 250] Ritual,
symbols, belief, and emotion in health, illness, and therapeutic processes.
Practices and politics of healing in western and non-western societies,
including shamanism, faith healing, ecstatic religious experience, alternative medicine, and biomedicine. Mind-body interactions, medical pluralism, relations between patients and healers, and implications for improving
medical care. [3] (P)
ANTH 3143. Medical Anthropology. [Formerly ANTH 240] Biocultural
aspects of human adaptations to health, disease, and nutrition. NonWestern medical and psychiatric systems. Effects of cultures on the interpretation, diagnosis, and treatment of illness. Case studies from Africa,
Oceania, Latin America, and the contemporary United States. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3144. Politics of Reproductive Health. Reproductive health politics, with focus on the United States. Role of broader social, economic,
and cultural concerns in diverse positions and public debates. How sexuality, race, class, gender, and disability shape experiences of conception,
pregnancy, childbirth, kinship, and new medical technologies. [3] (P)
ANTH 3145. Sexuality, Gender, and Culture. Theories and case studies
of sexuality and gender in Western and non-Western societies. Crosscultural perspectives on how class, race, ethnicity, culture, and power
influence sexual norms and gender roles. Performativity; masculinity and
femininity; kinship; religion and sexuality. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 2110. [3] (P)
ANTH 3150. Cognitive Anthropology. [Formerly ANTH 262] Methods
and approaches in linguistics and cognitive sciences. Exploration of culture and thought, and how culture affects our ways of reasoning, thinking,
and behavior. Repeat credit for students who completed 3150W. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3150W. Cognitive Anthropology. Methods and approaches in
linguistics and cognitive sciences. Exploration of culture and thought, and
how culture affects our ways of reasoning, thinking, and behavior. Repeat
credit for students who completed 3150. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3160. Anthropologies and Archaeologies of Community.
[Formerly ANTH 222] Creation, maintenance, and transformation of communities through time. Community as a village or settlement, and as an
“imagined” or virtual aspect of social identity. Behaviorist, interactionist,
discursive, and identity-oriented anthropological approaches to community. Community organization and the built environment. Ancient and modern case studies. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3161. Colonial Encounters in the Americas. [Formerly ANTH
231] Theoretical discussion of colonialism as a sociocultural process.
Comparative colonialism in pre- and post-Hispanic contexts. Methodological consideration of archaeological and archival analyses and their
complementary epistemological statuses. Pan-American case studies. [3]
(SBS)
ANTH 3162. Material Culture of New World Slavery. Enslaved Africans’ lives in the New World from an archaeological perspective. Housing,
artifacts, health, religion, and resistance in North America, South America,
and the Caribbean. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 294
section 1 in fall 2014. [3] (SBS)

A&S

146
ANTH 3200. Ancient Cities. [Formerly ANTH 216] Comparative examination of early cities in the Old World and pre-Columbian America. Analysis of social and economic processes supporting preindustrial urbanism.
Role of geography, ideology, trade, and settlement systems in the rise of
early urban societies. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3202. The Collapse of Civilizations. [Formerly ANTH 215]
Causes of the decline or collapse of complex societies. Old World and
New World examples. Historical, anthropological, and paleoecological
theories and controversies. [3] (P)
ANTH 3240. Ancient Mesoamerican Civilizations. [Formerly ANTH
212] Development of pre-Hispanic civilization in Mesoamerica from the
beginnings of village life to the rise of the great states and empires: Olmec,
Maya, Toltec, and Aztec civilizations. [3] (INT)
ANTH 3241. The Aztecs. [Formerly ANTH 247] Origins of the Aztec peoples of central Mexico and their culture; history and structure of the Aztec
empire; pre-Columbian social, political, and economic organization; warfare and religion; the Spanish conquest; colonial society in central Mexico;
ethno-graphic study of modern descendants of the Aztecs. [3] (INT)
ANTH 3243. Ancient Maya Gods and Rulers. [Formerly ANTH 281]
Politics and religion in Classic Maya culture, 100-1000 C.E. Sources and
symbols of power, ritual life, and metaphysical underpinnings of hierarchy
and cosmology. Relationships among ideology, religion, and politics. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3243W. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3243W. Ancient Maya Gods and Rulers. Politics and religion
in Classic Maya culture, 100-1000 C.E. Sources and symbols of power,
ritual life, and metaphysical underpinnings of hierarchy and cosmology.
Relationships among ideology, religion, and politics. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3243. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3250. The Inca Empire. [Formerly ANTH 254] The rise and fall of
the Inca state in the Southern American Andes. Inca society, agriculture,
economy, warfare, ancestor worship, mummies, and royal wealth. Imperial expansion, the role of the feasting in Inca politics, and place of ecology
in Inca religion. Destruction of the empire during the Spanish conquest;
persistence of pre-Columbian culture among Inca descendants in Peru
and Bolivia. [3] (INT)
ANTH 3260. Ceramic Analysis in Archaeology. [Formerly ANTH 279]
Ceramic sherds and vessels from ancient societies. Documentation of
form, fabric, and decoration through illustrations. Qualitative and quantitative analysis. Integration with archaeological contexts for ceramic sequences and chronology. Technology, production, exchange, and consumption.
Function and style. Emphasis on hands-on experience. [3] (HCA)
ANTH 3261. Introduction to Geographic Information Systems and
Remote Sensing. [Formerly ANTH 280] Computerized graphics and statistical procedures to recognize and analyze spatial patterning. Spatial data-collection, storage and retrieval; spatial analysis and graphic output of
map features. Integration of satellite imagery with data from other sources
through hands-on experience. Assumes basic knowledge of computer
hardware and software. [3] (MNS)
ANTH 3262. Ethics in Anthropology, Archaeology, and Development. [Formerly ANTH 283] Ethical perspectives on contemporary problems of archaeological and anthropological research, interaction, and interpretation of past and present non-Western societies. [3] (P)
ANTH 3343. Biology and Culture of Race. [Formerly ANTH 241] Biological and cultural perspectives on race in the United States and internationally. Patterns of human genetic variation. Biomedical use of racial
categories. Social and cultural construction of race. Racism and racial
discrimination. Racial disparities in health. [3] (P)
ANTH 3344. Genetic Anthropology Lab Techniques. [Formerly ANTH
272] Applications of molecular anthropology techniques. DNA data analysis. Genetic methods and findings. DNA comparisons between world
populations. Studies of ancient DNA. [3] (MNS)
ANTH 3346. Human Adaptation and Disease. Evolutionary perspectives on biological and cultural adaptations to physical and pathogen environments. Human variation, human evolutionary ecology, epidemiology,
and evolution of disease. Specific focus on epidemiological transitions.

vanderbilt university
Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 3890-02 offered fall 2016. [3] (MNS)
ANTH 3371. Social and Health Consequences of Pandemics. [Formerly ANTH 244] Origins, spread, mortality, and the biological and social
consequences. The epidemic of bubonic plague in the 1300s, known as
the European Black Death. The devastation of indigenous New World
populations by European diseases after 1492. Social and medical responses. Implications for modern societies. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3372. Human Osteology. [Formerly ANTH 270] Anatomy of the
human skeleton. Determination of age, sex, stature, and biological affinity
from bones and dentition. Analysis of archaeological skeletal remains for
diagnosis of disease and identification of cultural practices. Use of human
remains in criminal investigation. [3] (MNS)
ANTH 3620. Maya Language and Literature. [Formerly ANTH 221]
Introduction to a contemporary Maya language. Linguistic analysis and
cultural concepts. By permission of instructor. May be repeated for the
study of different Maya languages for a total of 6 credits. Repeat credit for
students who completed 3620W. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all
semesters of ANTH 221] (No AXLE credit)
ANTH 3622. Classic Maya Language and Hieroglyphs. [Formerly
ANTH 261] Linguistic analysis of Classic Maya hieroglyphs, 100-1000
C.E. Methods of decipherment reading and interpreting an ancient script.
Role of socioeconomic status in literacy. Repeat credit for students who
completed 3622W. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3622W. Classic Maya Language and Hieroglyphs. Linguistic
analysis of Classic Maya hieroglyphs, 100-1000 C.E. Methods of decipherment reading and interpreting an ancient script. Role of socioeconomic status in literacy. Repeat credit for students who completed 3622.
[3] (SBS)
ANTH 3850. Independent Research. [Formerly ANTH 288A] Readings
on selected topics (of the student’s choice) and the preparation of reports.
[1-3] (No AXLE credit)
ANTH 3851. Independent Research. [Formerly ANTH 288B] Readings
on selected topics (of the student’s choice) and the preparation of reports.
[1-3] (No AXLE credit)
ANTH 3865. Field Research. [Formerly ANTH 289] Directed field research on topics of the student’s choice. May be repeated for credit more
than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up
to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-6] (No AXLE credit)
ANTH 3866. Archaeological Excavation. Excavation techniques and
field recording methods through participation in an archaeological dig. Excavation unit layout, digging techniques, feature and artifact identification.
Mapping and field instrumentation. Data registry, statistical analysis, artifact curation, and conservation. Stratigraphy, relative and absolute dating,
sampling strategies and techniques, data management. Research design
and archaeological ethics. [4] (MNS)
ANTH 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly ANTH 287B] Offered on a
Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours
of 3880 will not count toward the Anthropology major or minor. Students
from any discipline can gain experience working with a local, national, or
international organization in developing a project to broaden their understanding of anthropological issues. Hours for background readings and
research will be completed in ANTH 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the numbers of hours taken in internship training in 3880. Normally
a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in ANTH, and prior
approval of the student’s plan by the director of undergraduate studies in
Anthropology are required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit)
ANTH 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly ANTH
287A] Readings and research conducted under the supervision of a member of the Anthropology department and a substantial research paper are
required. Students from any discipline can gain experience working with a
local, national, or international organization in developing a project to broaden their understanding of anthropological issues. Hours for background

College of Arts and Science / Courses

147

readings and research will be completed in ANTH 3881 concurrently with
and regardless of the numbers of hours taken in internship training in 3880.
Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in ANTH, and
prior approval of the student’s plan by the director of undergraduate studies in Anthropology are required. A research paper and report must be
submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is
completed. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-6] (No AXLE credit)

ANTH 4999. Honors Thesis. [Formerly ANTH 299] Open only to seniors
in the departmental honors program. Students completing this course
with distinction, including a thesis and final examination, will earn honors in
anthropology. Prerequisite: 4998. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits
if there is no duplication in topic. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all
semesters of 4999] (No AXLE credit)

ANTH 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly ANTH 294] Topics vary. May be
repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[3] (No AXLE credit)

Arabic

ANTH 3900. Theories of Culture and Human Nature. [Formerly ANTH
206] Survey of the views of anthropological thinkers, from the late nineteenth century to the present, about the basic attributes of humankind and
human culture. Comparison of different ideas of how people create culture
and in turn are molded by culture. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 3901. Problems in Anthropological Theory. [Formerly ANTH
284] An advanced seminar in anthropological theory: cultural evolution,
cultural history, ethnic relations, cultural ecology, archaeological method
and theory, social structure, political organizations, religious institutions.
[3] (SBS)
ANTH 4152. Activism and Social Change: Theory, Experience, and
Practice. [Formerly ANTH 286] Introduction to theory and ethics of social
activism and advocacy. Roles of academics and scholars. Theories of political organizing and mobilization. Application of anthropological research
methods. Case studies in local, national, and global social issues, processes of civic mobilization, and social change. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 4153. Economic Anthropology. [Formerly ANTH 234] Modern
and postmodern cultural organization of Western and non-Western economies. Crosscultural comparison of concepts of self-interest and rationality. Relation of the growth of post-industrial (service and information)
economies to economic strategies of ethnic groups. Survey of indigenous
alternatives to development. Theoretical issues grounded in case studies
from our own and other cultures. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 4154. Environmental Anthropology. [Formerly ANTH 207] The
relationship between human beings and the environments that sustain
them. Global diversity of human ecological adaptations. Hunter-gatherers,
pastoral nomads, slash-and-burn agriculturalists, and irrigation agriculturalists. Human impact on the environment. Theories of human ecological
interaction. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 4155. Realities and Worldviews: Why Culture Matters. [Formerly ANTH 255] Worldviews and constructed realities that influence
human behavior. Stereotyping and conflict as triggered by ontological
misunderstandings. Western ontology, science, and understanding the
Other. Interaction of worldviews and human behavior such as in resource
management and public health. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)
ANTH 4345. Human Evolutionary Genetics. [Formerly ANTH 273] Core
issues in human evolution and population genetics. Molecular evidence for
the origin of modern humans, reconstruction of human migrations, race,
and detection of admixture between populations. Implications for human disease. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who
earned credit for 294 section 1 in fall 2012. Prerequisite or corequisite:
BSCI 1100, BSCI 1105, or BSCI 1510. [3] (MNS)
ANTH 4373. Health and Disease in Ancient Populations. [Formerly
ANTH 274] Paleopathology of mummies and skeletons. Skeletal evidence
for violence and warfare. Gender and social status differences in diet,
disease, and activity patterns to reconstruct ancient social organization.
Biological relationships among ancient and modern populations. Ethics
and federal law in the study of human remains. Laboratory analysis of
skeletons. [3] (MNS)
ANTH 4998. Honors Research. [Formerly ANTH 298] Research to be
done in consultation with a member of the faculty in anthropology. Open
only to those beginning honors work in anthropology. May be repeated for
a total of 6 credits. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of
4998] (No AXLE credit)

ARA 1101. Elementary Arabic. [Formerly ARA 210A] Development of
reading, listening, speaking, and writing skills. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. [5] (No
AXLE credit)
ARA 1102. Elementary Arabic. [Formerly ARA 210B] Continuation of
1101. Development of reading, listening, speaking, and writing skills. No
credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic
language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [5] (INT)
ARA 2201. Intermediate Arabic. [Formerly ARA 220A] Practice and development of language skills at the intermediate-advanced level. Intensive
work in spoken Arabic with emphasis on vocabulary acquisition, reading
comprehension, and writing skills. Advanced grammar, modern Arabic
word formation, verb aspect usage, and structure of complex sentences.
No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic
language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)
ARA 2202. Intermediate Arabic. [Formerly ARA 220B] Continuation of
2201. Practice and development of language skills at the intermediateadvanced level. Intensive work in spoken Arabic with emphasis on vocabulary acquisition, reading comprehension, and writing skills. Advanced
grammar, modern Arabic word formation, verb aspect usage, and structure of complex sentences. No credit for students who have earned credit
for a more advanced Arabic language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (INT)
ARA 3101. Advanced Arabic. [Formerly ARA 230A] Further development
of listening, reading, speaking, and writing skills in the Arabic language.
Emphasis on grammar and literary techniques. Offered on a graded basis
only. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced
Arabic language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
ARA 3102. Advanced Arabic. [Formerly ARA 230B] Continuation of
3101. Further development of listening, reading, speaking, and writing
skills in the Arabic language. Emphasis on grammar and literary techniques. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have
earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. Prerequisite:
3101. [3] (INT)
ARA 3201. Media Arabic. [Formerly ARA 240] Listening to, discussing,
simulating, and analyzing Arabic media materials. Coverage of current and
historical events, such as TV broadcasts, headline news, documentaries,
and public discussions on political, religious, and cultural issues. Offered
on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3102. [3] (INT)
ARA 3301. Arabic of the Qur’an and Other Classical Texts. [Formerly ARA 250] Syntactical and morphological features of Classical Arabic.
Differences and similarities with Modern Standard Arabic in vocabulary
usage, semantic extensions, and context. Vocabulary borrowing. Texts
drawn from the Qur’an, Hadith, and Sira (biographical) literature. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (INT)

Aramaic
ARAM 2400. Introduction to Classical Syriac. Script and basic grammar. Historical context of language as Aramaic dialect. Simple readings
from Syriac translations of Christian and Jewish scripture. [3] (INT)
ARAM 2500. Egyptian Aramaic. Reading 5th century BCE texts from
the Jewish community at Elephantine. Papyri and ostraca. Historical, linguistic, and cultural context. Relationship to Biblical tradition. [3] (INT)

A&S

148

Art Studio
ARTS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ARTS 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)
ARTS 1099. Maymester Contemporary Art Blitz. [Formerly ARTS 285]
Intensive review of contemporary art through excursions to museums, galleries, and artists’ studios. Insights from curators, dealers, and films. Cities
vary each year. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no
duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

vanderbilt university
critique. Relationship to such traditional media as photography and film.
[3] (HCA)
ARTS 1701. Performance Art. [Formerly ARTS 172] History, theory, and
practice of performance. Vocal studies and conceptual music, personal
narrative, performance as a response to the cult-of-celebrity, body art, and
performance with new technologies. Collaborative and solo performance
projects. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1101. Introduction to Studio Art. [Formerly ARTS 101] Processes, fundamental elements, and principles of art. Drawing, painting, printmaking, sculpture, photography, installation, and time-based art. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1702. Portable Media I. [Formerly ARTS 173] Creative potential
of inexpensive, portable digital media devices. Establishment of a rapid
rhythm of practice and experimentation to build an inventory of ideas,
methods, and techniques. Historic and contemporary developments in
narrative and non-narrative digital video production. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1102. Drawing and Composition I. [Formerly ARTS 102] Introduction to drawing: visual problems related to observation, idea formation,
composition, media, and various forms of expression. Figure and landscape may be included. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1800. Sources of Contemporary Art. [Formerly ARTS 180] Contemporary studio art practice, issues, and theories. Visual and conceptual
influences on living artists; idea formation. Students must participate in
artist-in-residence projects. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly ARTS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)

ARTS 1900. Social Collective Art Practice. [Formerly ARTS 190] History and practice of making art within the social collective experience. Small
group projects based on everyday living in The Commons. No credit for
students who have taken 1111 section 1. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1200. Photography I. [Formerly ARTS 120] Black-and-white photography. The aesthetics and techniques of the black-and-white medium;
35mm camera use, film exposure, image quality, and darkroom practices.
[3] (HCA)
ARTS 1201. Alternative Photography. [Formerly ARTS 121] Methods in
image making. Photographic narratives, book making, pinhole cameras.
[3] (HCA)
ARTS 1202. Digital Imaging I. [Formerly ARTS 122] Creation of still,
photo-based images using digital cameras, scanners, and computer software for digital output. Issues in contemporary art. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 1300. Painting. [Formerly ARTS 130] Technical and conceptual
aspects of painting. Individual instruction based on ability and experience.
Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 1400. Ceramics. [Formerly ARTS 140] Introduction to ceramic
design and preparation of clay objects. Hand-building, wheel-throwing,
ceramic sculpture, surface enrichment, glazing, and kiln-firing. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 1401. Sculptural Ceramics. [Formerly ARTS 141] Expressive
art forms in clay. Assembled components, surface enrichment, and firing
techniques. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 1500. Sculpture. [Formerly ARTS 150] Changing concepts, materials, and processes in sculpture. Individual instruction based on ability
and experience. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 2100. Drawing and Composition II. [Formerly ARTS 202] Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 2101. Life Drawing I. [Formerly ARTS 205] Methods used to depict
form and structures of the human figure. Gesture, sighting and measuring,
contour drawing, and value. Planar and anatomical analysis. Metaphorical
and narrative use of the human figure in art. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 2102. Drawing: Color Media I. [Formerly ARTS 207] Drawing
on paper with wet and dry color media. Traditional and experimental approaches. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 2200. Photography II. [Formerly ARTS 220] Concepts and techniques of contemporary photographic practice; experimental projects and
workshops using analog and digital media. Issues in contemporary art.
Prerequisite: 1200, 121, or 1202. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 2202. Digital Imaging II. [Formerly ARTS 222] Advanced exploration of digital software and its integration with traditional media. Personal
projects and critiques. Issues in contemporary art. Prerequisite: 1202. [3]
(HCA)
ARTS 2300. Painting II. [Formerly ARTS 230] Prerequisite: 1300. [3]
(HCA)
ARTS 2400. Ceramics II. [Formerly ARTS 240] Development of ceramic design, both traditional and contemporary, functional and sculptural.
Projects develop technical and aesthetic goals. Instruction includes demonstrations, slide presentations, field trips, guest artists, reports. Demonstrations include advanced throwing, complex constructions, glaze development with applications, and kiln-firing. Prerequisite: 1400. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1501. Assemblage. [Formerly ARTS 151] Additive processes in
sculpture. Problems involving found objects, kinetic/time-based ideas,
and site-specific installations. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 2401. Concept and Clay: Composite Forms. [Formerly ARTS
241] Technical ability in handling clay and conceptual and interpretive elements in functional and/or sculptural forms. Individual solutions in form
and surface. Prerequisite: 1400 or 1401. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1502. Installation Art. [Formerly ARTS 152] Historical survey from
1900 to present; studio practice; formal and conceptual issues. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 2500. Sculpture II. [Formerly ARTS 250] Prerequisite: 1500, 1501,
or 1502. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1503. Text and Image. [Formerly ARTS 112] Intersection of art and
writing. History, theory, and practice. Zines, posters, photography, new
media, and artists’ books. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 2502. Advanced Installation Art. [Formerly ARTS 252] Techniques, processes, and placement. Conceptual and historical practices.
Prerequisite: 1502. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1600. Printmaking I: Relief and Intaglio. [Formerly ARTS 110]
Introduction to printmaking media, including relief and etchings. Traditional
and experimental approaches. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 2600. Printmaking II. [Formerly ARTS 210] Advanced study in
traditional and experimental printmaking processes. Prerequisite: 1600 or
1601. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1601. Printmaking I: Screen Printing and Lithography. [Formerly ARTS 111] Introduction to printmaking media, including screen
printing and lithography. Traditional and experimental approaches. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 2700. Video Art II. [Formerly ARTS 271] Viewing, discussion, analysis and critiques. Relationship to photography, film, and performance.
Group and individual productions. Prerequisite: 1700. [3] (HCA)

ARTS 1700. Video Art. [Formerly ARTS 171] Video as an art form. Group
and individual productions. Viewing and discussion. Project analysis and

ARTS 2701. Performance Art II. [Formerly ARTS 272] History, theory,
and practice. Vocal studies, conceptual music, personal narrative, performance as a response to the cult-of-celebrity, body art and performance

College of Arts and Science / Courses
with new technologies. Collaborative and individual performance projects.
Prerequisite: 1701. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 2702. Portable Media II. [Formerly ARTS 273] Advanced exploration in use of portable digital media devices. Variety of methods for conceptualizing and making projects; enhanced art making skills. Prerequisite: 1700, 1701, or 1702. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 3100. Drawing and Composition III. [Formerly ARTS 203] Prerequisite: 1102 and 2100. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 3101. Life Drawing II. [Formerly ARTS 206] Prerequisite: 2101.
[3] (HCA)
ARTS 3102. Drawing: Color Media II. [Formerly ARTS 208] Prerequisite: 2102. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 3200. Photography III. [Formerly ARTS 221] Personal projects
and critiques. Interdisciplinary possibilities. Issues in contemporary art.
Prerequisite: 2200 or 2202. [3] (HCA)
ARTS 3300. Painting III. [Formerly ARTS 231] Prerequisite: 2300. [3]
(HCA)
ARTS 3600. Printmaking III. [Formerly ARTS 211] Advanced study in
traditional and experimental printmaking processes. Prerequisite: 2600.
[3] (HCA)
ARTS 3851. Independent Research. [Formerly ARTS 289] Supervised
work beyond regular offerings in the curriculum. Students may only register with consent of instructor involved and with written approval of the
director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits
if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3
credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all
semesters of ARTS 3851] (No AXLE credit)
ARTS 3891. Selected Topics. [Formerly ARTS 288] May be repeated for
a total of 9 credits if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll
in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 9
credits total for all semesters of ARTS 3891] (HCA)
ARTS 3970. Directed Study: Senior Show and Contemporary Practices. [Formerly ARTS 290] Theoretical and practical concerns including
professional practices for artists. Students visit exhibitions and discuss
contemporary art with directed readings and lectures, participate in critiques, and exhibit their work. Seniors with a concentration in art only. [3]
(HCA)
ARTS 3971. Independent Research: Senior Show. [Formerly ARTS
291] Research conducted under faculty supervision specifically in preparation for the Senior Show. Open only to senior majors in their final term.
[3] (No AXLE credit)
ARTS 4998. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly ARTS 299A] Research
conducted in consultation with a faculty member in Art. Offered on a graded basis only. Open only to honors majors. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ARTS 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly ARTS 299B] Research
conducted in consultation with a faculty member in Art. Offered on a graded basis only. Open only to senior honors majors. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Asian Studies
ASIA 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ASIA 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ASIA 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly ASIA 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
ASIA 1201. Writing Southeast Asia. [Formerly ASIA 150] Literary representations, including novels and personal memoirs, of the history of
Southeast Asia. Colonial and postcolonial periods. Representations of

149
pluralistic cultures, diverse languages, religions, and indigenous and national identities. Indonesia, Myanmar, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
All texts in English translation. [3] (HCA)
ASIA 1680. Inside China. [Formerly ASIA 236] First-hand experience of
China’s dynamic society and expanding economy. Guided exploration of
famous historical sites and contemporary institutions such as hospitals,
businesses, factories, and art galleries in Beijing and Shanghai. Interviews
with individuals from many different walks of life, including physicians, entrepreneurs, migrant workers, and college students. No knowledge of Chinese is required. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)
ASIA 2100W. Fashioning the Self: Coming of Age and Asian Modernities. [Formerly ASIA 200W] The coming-of-age novel (Bildungsroman)
as a literary form in twentieth-century Asia. Travails of modernity and colonialism; the effects of crossing national, racial, and cultural boundaries; the
experiences of traveling to urban centers, foreign countries, and ancestral lands. Texts from China, Indonesia, Japan, Philippines, and Vietnam.
Taught in English. [3] (INT)
ASIA 2210W. Hollywood Hanoi. [Formerly ASIA 250W] Cultural narratives of the Vietnam War, including novels and films. War and representation. International, minority, and antiwar perspectives on the violence and
aftermath. Muhammad Ali, Werner Herzog, Jean Genet, Graham Greene,
and Dinh Linh. All texts in English translation. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 1111 section 4. [3] (INT)
ASIA 2511. Popular Culture in Modern Japan. [Formerly ASIA 211]
Popular culture in Japan from 1900 to the present. The rise of mass culture and media, song, sports, food, fashion, and popular film genres. [3]
(INT)
ASIA 2512. Explorations of Japanese Animation. [Formerly ASIA 212]
Introduction to the form and content of Japanese animation as globalized
popular entertainment and as a speculative artistic medium that explores
history and memory, nature and technology, human identity, carnivalesque
comedy, and gender relations. [3] (INT)
ASIA 2513W. Media Monsters in Contemporary Japan. [Formerly
ASIA 213W] The supernatural and the monstrous as represented in the
context of mass media and consumerism in contemporary Japan. Liveaction J-horror films, popular fiction, Manga, animated films, and television
series. [3] (HCA)
ASIA 2560. Current Japan-U.S. Relations. [Formerly ASIA 240] Similarities and differences in theory and practice in the United States and Japan
on public policy issues such as trade, defense, environment, education,
medical care, and racial prejudice. [3] (INT)
ASIA 2605. Romancing the Nation in Modern Chinese Literature.
From the fourteenth century to the present. Fiction, drama, and poetry.
Family relations and nation-state in romantic writings. Knowledge of Chinese is not required. [3] (HCA)
ASIA 2606. Martial Tradition in Chinese Literature. From eleventh
century BCE to modern period. War, banditry, revenge, cannibalism, female knight-errant. All genres of literature, supplemented by visual material, theater, and film. Knowledge of Chinese is not required. [3] (HCA)
ASIA 2607. Self and Society in Pre-modern Chinese Literature.
From the seventeenth-century BCE to the seventeenth-century CE. Poetry, prose, fiction, and drama. Self, society, religion, gender, and print
culture. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 3891 section 01 offered fall 2015. Knowledge of Chinese
is not required. [3] (HCA)
ASIA 2608. Chinese Drama: 13th to 20th Centuries. Traditional and
modern Chinese drama. Text, image, and performance. Gender, religious
thinking, commerce, and censorship. Offered on a graded basis only.
Knowledge of Chinese not required. [3] (HCA)
ASIA 2609W. Writing and Gender in Traditional China. Pre-modern
China: 1st century CE to 20th century CE. Women writers, women in family and society, gender relations, cross-dressing, and foot-binding. Poetry,
prose, drama, fiction, and visual materials. Offered on a graded basis only.
[3] (HCA)

A&S

150
ASIA 2630. Chinese Medicine. (Formerly HIST 282). [Formerly ASIA
230] Historical encounters and divergences between medicine in China
and in the West. Chinese medical classics, including the Inner Canon of
the Yellow Emperor and early herbal manuals. The creation of Traditional
Chinese Medicine in the People’s Republic of China and the emergence
of Chinese medicine as alternative medicine in the U.S. Serves as repeat
credit for students who completed HIST 282 prior to fall 2012 or HIST 248
prior to fall 2008. [3] (P)
ASIA 3151. The Third World and Literature. [Formerly ASIA 251] The
history of cultural and political concepts of the Third World from 1955 to
the present. Contemporary literary and cultural debates regarding models
of transnationalism and processes of globalization. National literatures and
cultures foundational to the Third World model. The relationship between
the genre of the novel and the formation of national communities. [3] (INT)
ASIA 3633. Self-Cultivation in Ancient China. [Formerly ASIA 233] 300
BCE to 500 CE. Methods, goals, and contexts of self-cultivation in antiquity. Breathing exercises, meditation, visualization, sexual arts, sacrifice,
alchemy, and other practices in their religious, cultural, and social contexts. [3] (INT)
ASIA 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly ASIA 289A] Designed primarily for majors who want to study Asian topics not regularly offered in the
curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit
more than once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester
of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
ASIA 3852. Independent Study. [Formerly ASIA 289B] Designed primarily for majors who want to study Asian topics not regularly offered in the
curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit
more than once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester
of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
ASIA 3891. Special Topics. [Formerly ASIA 294A] Topics vary. May be
repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[1-3] (No AXLE credit)
ASIA 3892. Special Topics. [Formerly ASIA 294B] Topics vary. May be
repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[1-3] (No AXLE credit)
ASIA 3980. Junior Honors Readings. [Formerly ASIA 297] May be repeated for credit more than once. Students may enroll in more than one
section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ASIA 4998. Honors Research. [Formerly ASIA 299A] Research conducted in consultation with a member of the faculty or affiliated faculty of
the program. Open only to senior honors majors. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

vanderbilt university
ASTR 1020L. Introductory Daytime Astronomy Laboratory. [Formerly
ASTR 104] Phases of the Moon, colors of stars, shapes and motions of
galaxies, properties of exoplanets, and ages of star clusters. Telescopic
observations of the Sun. Laboratory ordinarily accompanied by 1010 or
3000. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with
1010 or 3000. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1010L or
1210. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ASTR 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly ASTR 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)]
ASTR 1210. Introduction to Observational Astronomy. [Formerly
ASTR 122] Telescopic and naked eye observations. Light, optics, telescopes, and CCD cameras. Motions of the sky. Kepler’s laws. Phases
and topography of the Moon. Distances, temperatures, and brightnesses
of stars. Star clusters. Dark matter. Taught entirely at Dyer Observatory
using 24-inch telescope. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement. Students who have earned credit for 1010 or 3000 will earn one credit hour
for this course. Students who have earned credit for 1010L or 1020L will
earn three credit hours for this course. Students who have earned credit
for 1010L or 1020L and either 1010 or 3000 will earn no credit hours for
this course. [4] (MNS)
ASTR 2110. The Solar System. [Formerly ASTR 201] The sky, orbits,
and gravity. Ancient astronomy. Seasons, the calendar, phases and motions of the moon, tides, and eclipses. Terrestrial planets, giant planets
and their moons and rings, asteroids, comets, meteorites, and the sun.
Habitable zones for planets and moons, extremophiles, and the possibility
of life on other worlds. [3] (MNS)
ASTR 2130. The Trial of Galileo and its Background. [Formerly ASTR
203] The interdependence of cosmological theories and religious teachings from the eighth century BCE to the end of the seventeenth century.
Examines scientific works and religious texts, including those of Aristotle,
Thomas Aquinas, Copernicus, Luther, Galileo, and Newton. [3] (P)
ASTR 3000. Principles of Astrophysics. [Formerly ASTR 205] Tools
and methods of astrophysics, including light and telescopes. Cosmology,
the Big Bang, and the origin and evolution of matter. Galaxies, star formation, and the physics of stars, including nucleosynthesis and stellar death.
Techniques for discovering and measuring properties of exoplanets. Prerequisite: either PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1901: and either MATH 1200 or
1300. [3] (MNS)

ASIA 4999. Honors Research. [Formerly ASIA 299B] Research conducted in consultation with a member of the faculty or affiliated faculty of
the program. Open only to senior honors majors. Prerequisite: 4998. [1-3]
(No AXLE credit)

ASTR 3600. Stellar Astrophysics. [Formerly ASTR 252] Physics of stellar structure and evolution, including nuclear energy generation, equations
of state, and heat transfer by radiation and convection. Numerical stellar
models. Observational aspects of stellar astrophysics. Prerequisite: either
MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610; either PHYS 2255 or 3651; 3200; and either
CS 1101 or 1103. [3] (MNS)

Astronomy

ASTR 3700. Galactic Astrophysics. [Formerly ASTR 253] Interstellar
matter and gaseous nebulae, the structure and evolution of normal galaxies, active galactic nuclei and quasars, and observational cosmology. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 8040. Prerequisite: MATH
2400, 2420, or 2610; and either PHYS 2255 or 3651. Corequisite: CS
1101 or 1103. [3] (MNS

ASTR 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ASTR 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ASTR 1010. Introductory Astronomy: Stars and Galaxies. [Formerly
ASTR 102] Observed and physical properties of stars. Supernovae, neutron stars, and black holes. Our Milky Way galaxy and other galaxies.
Cosmology, dark matter, dark energy, and the Big Bang. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 1210. [3] (MNS)
ASTR 1010L. Introductory Nighttime Astronomy Laboratory. [Formerly ASTR 103] Motion of the celestial sphere and apparent and real
motions of celestial bodies as viewed from inside the Milky Way. Observations of meteor showers, comets, and artificial satellites. Telescopic observations of astronomical objects. Stellar spectra. Laboratory ordinarily
accompanied by 1010 or 3000. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement
when completed with 1010 or 3000. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 1020L or 1210. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ASTR 3800. Structure Formation in the Universe. [Formerly ASTR
254] Observational and theoretical aspects of extragalactic astronomy.
Measurements of galaxies and of the large-scale structure of the universe
from galaxy surveys. Expansion history of universe; roles of dark matter
and energy. Growth of density fluctuations in universe due to gravity. Cosmological N-body simulations and formation of dark matter halos. Physics of galaxy formation. Experimental probes of dark matter and energy.
Prerequisite: One of PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1901; and one of PHYS 1502,
1602, or 1902; and one of MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610; and one of CS
1101 or 1103. [3] (MNS)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
ASTR 3850. Undergraduate Research. Research and scholarly investigation or directed readings in astronomy under close supervision of
sponsoring faculty member. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring
faculty member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be
repeated for credit, for a total of no more than 10 total credit hours and for
no more than 5 credit hours per semester. [1-5] (No AXLE credit)
ASTR 3851. Undergraduate Immersion Research. Research and
scholarly investigation or directed readings in astronomy under close supervision of sponsoring faculty member, including end-of-semester oral
presentation or written report. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring
faculty member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be
repeated for credit, for a total of no more than 10 total credit hours and for
no more than 5 credit hours per semester. [1-5] (No AXLE credit)
ASTR 3852. Undergraduate Summer or Off-Campus Immersion Research. Research and scholarly investigation in astronomy conducted in
the summer at either Vanderbilt or in an approved off-campus program,
including an end-of-session oral presentation or written report. Must be
fulltime effort for a minimum of six weeks. Enrollment by approval of director of undergraduate studies. Offered on a pass/fail basis only. Not for
credit. [0] (No AXLE credit)
ASTR 3890. Selected Topics. [1-3] (No AXLE Credit)
ASTR 3900. General Relativity and Cosmology. [Formerly ASTR
260] Introduction to Einstein’s theory describing gravity as a curvature of
spacetime. Tensor analysis, special relativity, differential geometry, spacetime curvature, the Einstein field equations, the Schwartzschild metric for
stars and black holes, and the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker metric for
cosmology. Prerequisite: PHYS 2270 and 2290. [3] (MNS)
ASTR 4998. Honors Research and Senior Thesis. [Formerly ASTR
296] Independent experimental or theoretical investigations of basic problems in astronomy and astrophysics under faculty supervision, culminating
in a written thesis submitted to and an oral defense presented to a departmental faculty examination committee. Required for departmental honors
in Astronomy. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring faculty member
and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a
total of 10 credits, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester
of enrollment. Prerequisite: major in Physics, junior or senior standing. [16] (No AXLE credit)

Biological Sciences
BSCI 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly BSCI 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 1100. Biology Today. [Formerly BSCI 100] Broad coverage of the
biological sciences presenting evolution as the unifying concept. Particular emphasis on basic biological processes in cells and the relationships/
interactions between organisms and their environment. Topics include cell
structure and function, genetics and inheritance, evolution and diversity,
populations, communities and ecosystems, and topics related to biology
and society. Students who take 1510-1511 shall not receive credit for
1100. Corequisite: 1100L. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 1100L. Biology Today Laboratory. [Formerly BSCI 101A] Laboratory investigations of the genetics, physiology, and ecology of plants and
animals. One three-hour laboratory per week to accompany 1100. Students who take 1510L, 1511L or 1512L shall not receive credit for 1100L.
Corequisite: 1100. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1100. [1] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 1103. Green Earth: The Biodiversity and Evolution of Plants.
[Formerly BSCI 118] Biodiversity of plants, their adaptations to the environment, and their evolutionary and ecological relationships. Basic biology of
plant form and function and the importance of plants for life on Earth. Not
intended for students planning to major in biological sciences. Three hours
of lecture and one laboratory period per week. [4] (MNS)
BSCI 1105. Human Biology. [Formerly BSCI 105] Recent advances in
genetics, reproduction, and biotechnology. Social, legal, and ethical implications. Three lectures and one laboratory period per week. Not intended

151
for students majoring in Biological Sciences. Students who take 15101511 may not receive credit for 1105. [4] (MNS)
BSCI 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly BSCI 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
BSCI 1510. Introduction to Biological Sciences. [Formerly BSCI
110A] An integrative approach to the science of life for science and engineering students. Macromolecular structure and function. Cell structure,
reproduction, metabolism, and energy production. Genomes, replication,
gene structure, RNA, and protein synthesis. Students who have completed 1100 or 1105 will forfeit full credit for 1100 or three hours of credit for
1105 upon completion of this course. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM
1601. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 1510L. Biological Sciences Laboratory. [Formerly BSCI 111A]
Laboratory to accompany 1510. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1510. Students who have completed 1100L or 1105 will forfeit full credit for 1100L
or one hour of credit for 1105 upon completion of this course. Prerequisite
or corequisite: 1510. [1] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 1511. Introduction to Biological Sciences. [Formerly BSCI 110B]
Continuation of 1510. Cell communication. Physiology, organ function and
development. Mendelian and population genetics. Evolution, ecology, and
speciation. Populations, ecosystems, and conservation biology. Students
who have completed 1100 or 1105 will forfeit full credit for 1100 or three
hours of credit for 1105 upon completion of this course. Prerequisite:
1510. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 1511L. Biological Sciences Laboratory. [Formerly BSCI 111B]
Laboratory to accompany 1511. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1511. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 1512L. Students who have
earned credit for 1100L or 1105 will forfeit full credit for 1100L or one hour
of credit for 1105 upon completion of this course. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1511. [1] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 1512L. Biological Sciences Laboratory. [Formerly BSCI 111C]
Alternative to 1511L. Directed research projects with emphasis on experimental design and analysis. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement
when completed with 1511. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 1511L. Students who have earned
credit for 1100L or 1105 will forfeit full credit for 1100L or one hour of
credit for 1105 upon completion of this course. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1511. Prerequisite: 1510L. [2] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 2056. Non-Equivalent Credit (BSCI Introductory Lab). [Formerly
71CT] This course has no Vanderbilt equivalent. Credit is eligible to count
toward the Introductory Lab requirement of the BSCI major or minor.
BSCI 2201. Introduction to Cell Biology. [Formerly BSCI 201] Structure
and function of cells, subcellular organelles, and macromolecules. Fundamentals of organelle function, membrane transport, energy production
and utilization, cell motility, cell division, intracellular transport and mechanisms of signal transduction. Prerequisite: 1510. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 2201L. Cell Biology Laboratory. [Formerly BSCI 202] One threehour laboratory and discussion period per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab
course requirement when completed with 2201. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2201. [1] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 2205. Evolution. [Formerly BSCI 205] Evolutionary theory, with
emphasis on evolutionary mechanisms. Microevolutionary processes of
adaptation and speciation and macro-evolutionary patterns. Evidence
from genetics, ecology, molecular biology, and paleontology in the historical context of the neo-Darwinian synthesis. Three lectures per week. No
credit for graduate students in Biological Sciences. Prerequisite: 1511. [3]
(MNS)

A&S

152
BSCI 2210. Principles of Genetics. [Formerly BSCI 210] Basic principles and mechanisms of inheritance discussed and related to other biological phenomena and problems. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

vanderbilt university
tions and their roles in sexual selection, mating systems, and animal communication. Prerequisite: 1511 and 2205. [3] (MNS)

BSCI 2210L. Genetics Laboratory. [Formerly BSCI 211] One three-hour
laboratory and discussion period per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course
requirement when completed with 2210. Prerequisite or corequisite:
2210. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI 3243. Genetics of Disease. [Formerly BSCI 243] Application of genetics, cell biology, and molecular biology to the study of human diseases.
Genomics, gene mapping, and molecular techniques. Animal models of
disease. Chromosomal abnormalities, single-gene and multifactorial diseases, and epigenetics. Prerequisite: 2210. [3] (MNS)

BSCI 2218. Introduction to Plant Biology. [Formerly BSCI 218] Diversity of plants within the framework of their evolution and environmental adaptations. Biomes from the tropical rain forest to the Vanderbilt arboretum.
Three lectures and one laboratory per week. Prerequisite: 1511. [4] (MNS)

BSCI 3245. Biology of Cancer. [Formerly BSCI 245] Application of cell
biology, molecular biology, and genetics to the study of cancer. Tumorigenesis; cellular oncogenes; growth factor signaling; tumor suppressor
genes; apoptosis; metastasis and invasion. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI 2219. Introduction to Zoology. [Formerly BSCI 219] A structural
and functional study of the major animal groups. The problems presented
to animals by their environments, and the anatomical and physiological
mechanisms by which they adapt. Three lectures and one laboratory period per week. Prerequisite: 1511. [4] (MNS)

BSCI 3247. Molecular Evolution. [Formerly BSCI 247] The theory of
evolution at the molecular level. The evolution of DNA and RNA sequences, proteins, and genome structures will be studied using models from
population genetics and comparative approaches. Molecular clocks, the
evolution of gene regulation and globin genes, molecular phylogeny, and
human evolution. Prerequisite: 2210 and 2205. [3] (MNS)

BSCI 2238. Ecology. [Formerly BSCI 238] Population biology, evolutionary ecology, community structure, with emphasis on species interactions,
including competition, predation, and symbiosis. Prerequisite: 1511. [3]
(MNS)
BSCI 2238L. Ecology Lab. [Formerly BSCI 237] One three-hour laboratory and discussion period or field trip per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab
course requirement when completed with 2238. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2238. [1] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 2520. Biochemistry. [Formerly BSCI 220] Structure and mechanism of action of biological molecules, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and
polysaccharides. Enzymology. Carbohydrate metabolism. Prerequisite:
1510 and either CHEM 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3226. Immunology. [Formerly BSCI 226] The molecular and cellular
basis of immunity. Emphasis on molecular structure, the genetic origin of
diversity in B-cell and T-cell receptors, antigen presentation, and the cellular interactions leading to the immune response. Tolerance, tumor and
transplantation immunity, autoimmune and immunodeficiency diseases,
and allergy. Prerequisite: 2201 or 2210. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3228. Biodiversity: Great Barrier Reef and Rainforests of Australia. May session; two weeks on campus followed by two weeks in Australia. Origins. Threats to, and conservation of, populations and species.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 290-01 offered summer
2015 or 3890-01 offered summer 2016. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3230. Biological Clocks. [Formerly BSCI 230] Study of innate
mechanisms for measurement of time in living organisms. Emphasis on
the functional significance and physiological basis of biological clocks in
animals and humans. Topics include circadian rhythms, time-compensated celestial navigation, photoperiodism, and the role of biological clocks in
human behavior. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3233. Conservation Biology. [Formerly BSCI 233] Ecological, evolutionary, social, and economic aspects of biodiversity loss and ecosystem
disruption due to human activities. Climate change, habitat fragmentation, species overexploitation, and invasive species. Sustainable development, habitat restoration, and species reintroduction. Prerequisite: 1511.
[3] (MNS)
BSCI 3234. Microbiology. [Formerly BSCI 234] Microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, and mobile genetic elements. The origins and universality of microbial life, modes of genome evolution, symbioses between
microbes and animals, biotechnology, and human microbiome. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3236. Parasitology. [Formerly BSCI 236] Biology and epidemiology
of eukaryotic parasites of medical and veterinary significance. Diagnosis,
treatment, and control of parasitic protists, platyhelminthes, nematodes,
and arthropods. Impact on global health. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3239. Evolution of Behavior. [Formerly BSCI 239] Theoretical and
empirical research on the evolution of behavior. Evolutionary approaches
to the study of animal behavior, including the role of behavior in foraging,
competition, predator-prey interactions, and sociality. Behavioral adapta-

BSCI 3252. Cellular Neurobiology. [Formerly BSCI 252] Structure and
function of nerve cells. Emphasis on electrical excitability, synaptic transmission, and sensory transduction. Cellular mechanisms underlying simple
behaviors, sensory information processing, and learning and memory.
Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3254. Neurobiology of Behavior. [Formerly BSCI 254] Nerve cell
interactions in neuronal networks of the central nervous system of animals
and their impact for regulating behavior. Sensory systems, sensory-motor
integration, central processing of information, neuronal-hormonal interactions; and brain anatomy and organization in invertebrates and vertebrates. Prerequisite: BSCI 1511 or NSC 2201. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3256. Molecules of the Brain. [Formerly BSCI 256] Molecules
of neural wiring, involving cell identity, pathfinding, synaptogenesis. Molecules of nerve cell communication, with relationship to drugs of addiction
and abuse. Molecules of nervous system plasticity, and the mechanistic
bases of learning and memory. Relation of these mechanisms to causes of
human neurological diseases. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3258. Vertebrate Physiology. [Formerly BSCI 258] Fundamental
mechanisms of the major vertebrate physiological systems with an emphasis on humans. Special physiological adaptations of vertebrates to
their environment (respiration of aquatic animals, birds, and deep diving
mammals; salt balance in fresh and saltwater environments; altitude adaptation). Prerequisite: 2201 or 2520. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3270. Statistical Methods in Biology. [Formerly BSCI 270] An
introduction to statistical methods used in the analysis of biological experiments, including the application of computer software packages. Emphasis on testing of hypotheses and experimental design. Topics include
descriptive statistics, analysis of variance, regression, correlation, contingency analysis, and the testing of methods for sampling natural populations. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3272. Genome Science. [Formerly BSCI 272] Aims and importance of the science. Retrieval of genome data from public databases;
experimental and computational methods used in analysis of genome data
and their annotation. Functional aspects of genomics, transcriptomics,
and proteomics; use of phylogenetics and population genomics to infer
evolutionary relationships and mechanisms of genome evolution. Prerequisites: 1511. [3] (MNS)
BSCI 3850. Independent Reading. [Formerly BSCI 282] Reading and
discussion of research papers with a member of the faculty. Prerequisite:
consent of Biological Sciences 3850 coordinator before the end of the
previous semester. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course
each semester. [1; maximum of 2 credits total for all semesters of BSCI
3850] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 3860. Introduction to Research. [Formerly BSCI 280] Work in
the laboratory of a member of the Biological Sciences faculty. Term paper
required. Consent of course coordinator and enrollment by arrangement

College of Arts and Science / Courses

153

before the end of the previous semester is required. Prerequisite: 1510.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1511. [1] (No AXLE credit)

Chemical Biology

BSCI 3861. Directed Laboratory Research. [Formerly BSCI 283] Directed student research on a project conceived by a member of the Biological Sciences faculty. Enrollment by arrangement before the end of the
previous semester. May be taken only once, and participants ordinarily
expected to have overall grade point average of B or better. Offered on a
graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1511, one intermediate BSCI course appropriate to the major or 3860, and consent of Biological Sciences 3861
coordinator. [2-4] (No AXLE credit)

BCB 3101. Special Topics in Chemical Biology. May be repeated
for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite:
CHEM 3710. [3] (MNS)

BSCI 3890. Special Topics in Biological Sciences. [Formerly BSCI
290] Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once by permission of the director of undergraduate studies. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 1511. [3]
(MNS)
BSCI 3961. Independent Laboratory Research. [Formerly BSCI 286]
Original student research on a defined problem in Biological Sciences and
under the supervision of Biological Sciences faculty. Some independence
in the design and execution of the problem. Enrollment by arrangement
before the end of the previous semester. Prerequisite: 3861, consent of
Biological Sciences 3961 coordinator, cumulative grade point average of
B. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only
up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [2-6] (No AXLE credit)
BSCI 3965. Undergraduate Seminar. [Formerly BSCI 275] Discussions
and papers based on readings in research journals. Topics vary. Prerequisite: fulfillment of the intermediate course requirements for the major. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic,
but only two hours may count toward the major. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course each semester. [2] (No AXLE credit)

BCB 2101. Chemical Biology Focus. Roles of proteins, lipids, nucleic
acids, and carbohydrates in human disease. Experimental techniques.
Prerequisite: CHEM 2221 and BSCI 1510. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BCB 3201. Independent Laboratory Research. Original student research under the supervision of faculty associated with the Biochemistry
and Chemical Biology major. Design and execution of a scientific problem.
Enrollment by arrangement before the end of the previous semester. Prerequisite: BSCI 1510 and CHEM 1020 or 1602, consent of Biochemistry
and Chemical Biology Director of Undergraduate Studies, 3.0 cumulative
grade point average. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [2-6] (No
AXLE credit)
BCB 4320. Advanced Chemical Biology. (Also listed as CPBP 8320
Foundations in Chemical Biology) Overviews and in-depth case studies
on the breadth of chemical biology. Importance of chemical biology in advancing biological sciences. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite:
CHEM 3710 [3] (MNS)

Chemistry
CHEM 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly CHEM 99] Topics vary.
General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)

BSCI 4265. Nucleic Acid Transactions. [Formerly BSCI 265] Biochemistry of the expression, transmission, and maintenance of genetic information. DNA transcription, replication, recombination, and repair. Structural
mechanisms and biological functions of DNA processing proteins. Offered
on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2520. [3] (MNS)

CHEM 1010. Introductory Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 101A] General
principles for non-science majors or those not planning on taking additional chemistry courses. The periodic table, chemical reactions, properties of solutions, and atmospheric chemistry with connections to global
environmental issues. No prior chemistry experience required. Not a prerequisite for advanced courses in chemistry. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 1601, 2211, or 2221. [3] (MNS)

BSCI 4266. Advanced Molecular Genetics. [Formerly BSCI 266] Principles of classical and molecular genetic analysis: mutation and recombination, mapping, and the application of genetic methodology to the study
of complex systems. Special emphasis on modern genomic approaches.
Prerequisite: 2210. [3] (MNS)

CHEM 1010L. Introductory Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM
100A] Laboratory to accompany 1010. One three-hour laboratory per
week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with
1010. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1601L or 2221L.
Corequisite: 1010. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI 4274. Proteins. [Formerly BSCI 274] Molecular structures and biological functions of proteins. Underlying chemical and physical properties.
Structural motifs and topology; folding and dynamics; enzyme catalysis;
protein-DNA interactions. Structure-based drug design; protein symmetry; supramolecular protein machines. Chemical and spectroscopic
methods to probe protein structure and behavior in solution. Prerequisite:
2520. [3] (MNS)

CHEM 1020. Introductory Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 101B] General
principles for non-science majors or those not planning on taking additional chemistry courses. Chemistry of water, basic nuclear chemistry, organic
and biochemistry, with discussion of the chemistry of common medicines
and nutritional chemistry. No prior chemistry experience required. Not a
prerequisite for advanced courses in chemistry. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 1602, 2212, or 2222. [3] (MNS)

BSCI 4999. Honors Research. [Formerly BSCI 296] Open only to majors
in the Honors Program. May be repeated for credit more than once, but
students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [4-6]
(No AXLE credit)

CHEM 1020L. Introductory Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM
100B] Laboratory to accompany 1020. One three-hour laboratory per
week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with
1020. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1602L or 2222L.
Corequisite: 1020. [1] (No AXLE credit)

Catalan
CTLN 1103. Intensive Elementary Catalan. [Formerly CTLN 102] Romance tongue of northeastern Spain, Andorra, and southwestern France.
Emphasis on oral communication, grammar, reading, and culture. Prior
study of another Romance language through the intermediate level is expected. No credit for students who have earned credit for a higher level
Catalan language course. [3] (INT)

CHEM 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly CHEM 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
CHEM 1601. General Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 102A] General principles of chemistry for science and engineering students. Composition and
structure of matter, chemical reactions, bonding, solution chemistry, and
kinetics. Thermodynamics, equilibrium, acids and bases, electrochemistry, and coordination compounds. Three lectures per week and a recitation period. Students who have earned credit for 1010 will forfeit credit for
1010 upon completion of this course. Corequisite: 1601L. [3] (MNS)

A&S

154
CHEM 1601L. General Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM 104A]
Laboratory to accompany 1601. One three-hour laboratory per week.
Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1601.
Students who have earned credit for 1010L will forfeit credit for 1010L
upon completion of this course. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1601. [1] (No
AXLE credit)
CHEM 1602. General Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 102B] Continuation
of 1601. General principles of chemistry for science and engineering students. Composition and structure of matter, chemical reactions, bonding,
solution chemistry, and kinetics. Thermodynamics, equilibrium, acids and
bases, electrochemistry, and coordination compounds. Three lectures per
week and a recitation period. Students who have earned credit for 1020
will forfeit credit for 1020 upon completion of this course. Prerequisite:
1601. Corequisite: 1602L. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 1602L. General Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM 104B]
Laboratory to accompany 1602. One three-hour laboratory per week.
Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1602.
Students who have earned credit for 1020L will forfeit credit for 1020L
upon completion of this course. Prerequisite: 1601L. Corequisite: 1602.
[1] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 2100. Introduction to Analytical Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM
210] Fundamental quantitative analytical chemistry with emphasis on principles of analysis, separations, equilibria, stoichiometry and spectrophotometry. No credit for graduate students in chemistry. Corequisite: 2100L.
[3] (MNS)
CHEM 2100L. Analytical Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM
212A] Laboratory to accompany Chemistry 2100. No credit for graduate
students in chemistry. One four-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the
AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2100. Prerequisite or
corequisite: 2100. [1] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 2211. Organic Chemistry for Advanced Placement Students.
[Formerly CHEM 218A] Fundamental types of organic compounds; their
nomenclature, classification, preparations, reactions, and general application. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation each week. Equivalent to 2221. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2221 or
2222. Prerequisite: enrollment limited to first-year students with advanced
placement chemistry scores of 5, or the approval of the director of undergraduate studies. Corequisite: 2221L. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 2212. Organic Chemistry for Advanced Placement Students.
[Formerly CHEM 218B] Continuation of 2211. Fundamental types of organic compounds; their nomenclature, classification, preparations, reactions, and general application. Three hours of lecture and one hour of
recitation each week. Equivalent to 2222. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 2221 or 2222. Prerequisite: enrollment limited to first-year
students with advanced placement chemistry scores of 5, or the approval
of the director of undergraduate studies. Corequisite: 2222L. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 2221. Organic Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 220A] Fundamental
types of organic compounds. Nomenclature and classification. Preparations, reactions, and general application. Three hours of lecture and
one hour of recitation each week. Serves as repeat credit for 2211. No
credit for graduate students in chemistry. Prerequisite: 1602. Corequisite:
2221L. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 2221L. Organic Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM 219A]
Laboratory to accompany 2211 or 2221. One four-hour laboratory per
week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with
2211 or 2221. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2211 or 2221. [1] (No AXLE
credit)
CHEM 2222. Organic Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 220B] Continuation of 2221. Fundamental types of organic compounds. Nomenclature
and classification. Preparations, reactions, and general application. Three
hours of lecture and one hour of recitation each week. Serves as repeat
credit for 2212. No credit for graduate students in chemistry. Prerequisite:
2221. Corequisite: 2222L. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 2222L. Organic Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM 219B]
Laboratory to accompany 2212 or 2222. One four-hour laboratory per
week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with

vanderbilt university
2212 or 2222. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2212 or 2222. [1] (No AXLE
credit)
CHEM 2610. Introduction to Nanochemistry. [Formerly CHEM 240]
Synthesis, characterization, and assembly of nanoscale materials. No
credit for graduate students in chemistry. Prerequisite: 1602. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3010. Inorganic Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 203] A survey of
modern inorganic chemistry including coordination compounds and the
compounds of the main-group elements. Representative reactions and
current theories are treated. Prerequisite or corequisite: 3300 or 3310.
[3] (MNS)
CHEM 3020. Introduction to Bioinorganic Chemistry. [Formerly
CHEM 202] Functions of inorganic elements in living cells. The manner
in which coordination can modify the properties of metallic ions in living
systems. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3120. Instrumental Analytical Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM
211] Chemical and physical principles of modern analytical chemistry instrumentation. Prerequisite: 2100 and either 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3135W. Forensic Analytical Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 227W]
Techniques, methodologies, data collection, and interpretation. Laboratory experience with drug analysis, toxicology, trace, and arson analysis.
Two hours of lecture and one four-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite:
2100 and 2100L. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3220. Spectroscopic Identification of Organic Compounds.
[Formerly CHEM 225] Theoretical and practical aspects of spectroscopic
methods, with an emphasis on NMR spectroscopy, for structural characterization of organic compounds. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3300. Physical Chemistry: Quantum Mechanics, Spectroscopy, and Kinetics. [Formerly CHEM 230] Chemical kinetics and principles of quantum chemistry applied to molecular structure, bonding, and
spectroscopy. Prior study of multivariable calculus is expected. No credit
for graduate students in chemistry. Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS
1501, 1601, or 1901. Prerequisite: MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3310. Biophysical Chemistry: Thermodynamics in Chemical and Biological Systems. [Formerly CHEM 231] Chemical thermodynamics and equilibrium, their statistical foundation, and applications to
chemical and biological phenomena in biomedical research. Prerequisite
or corequisite: PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1901. Prerequisite: MATH 1201 or
1301. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3315. Physical Chemistry Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM 236]
Experiments in chemical thermodynamics and kinetics. Data analysis and
presentation. No credit for graduate students in chemistry. One three-hour
laboratory or one lecture per week. Calculus through Math 2300 recommended. Prerequisite: 2222L and either MATH 1201 or 1301. [1] (No
AXLE credit)
CHEM 3600. Chemical Literature. [Formerly CHEM 250] Assigned
readings and problems in the nature and use of the chemical literature.
Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [1] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 3630. Macromolecular Chemistry: Polymers, Dendrimers,
and Surface Modifications. [Formerly CHEM 235] Synthesis and
characterization of macromolecular materials including linear, branched,
dendrimetric, and star polymers. Mechanical and physiochemical properties of polymeric types. Kinetics of living polymerization. Applications to
nanostructures, templates, and advanced devices. Prerequisite: 1602. [3]
(MNS)
CHEM 3710. Bioorganic Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 224] Essential
metabolites including vitamins, steroids, peptides, and nucleotides. Consideration of phosphate esters and the synthesis of oligodeoxynucleotides. Three lectures per week. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 3715. Chemistry of the Coral Reef. Application of quantitative
analytical chemistry techniques and spectroscopic methods to characterize molecules with potential materials chemistry or medicinal chemistry
applications. In-depth chemistry research experience; mandatory participation in all scheduled field research and laboratory sessions. Prerequisite:
2100, 2100L, 2222, 2222L [3] (MNS)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
CHEM 3841. Readings for Honors. [Formerly CHEM 291A] Open only
to students in the departmental honors program. General reading supervised by research adviser. [2] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 3842. Readings for Honors. [Formerly CHEM 291B] Open only
to students in the departmental honors program. Continuation of 3841,
with emphasis on research planned. [2] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly CHEM 282] Open to
students who have earned at least 8 hours of credit and a minimum GPA
of 2.7 in chemistry, with consent of the director of undergraduate studies
and the sponsoring faculty member. May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3
credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 3980. Honors Research. [Formerly CHEM 292A] Open only to
students in the departmental honors program. Original research supervised by research adviser, to be reported in thesis form with oral examination thereon. [2] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 4050. Introduction to Organometallic Chemistry. [Formerly
CHEM 207] A general description of the preparation, reaction chemistry,
molecular structure, bonding, and spectroscopic identification of organometallic compounds of the transition metals. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 4210. Organic Chemistry Structure and Mechanism. [Formerly CHEM 220C] Stereochemistry and conformational analysis; mechanisms of organic reactions; linear free-energy relationships; reactive intermediates. Three lectures and one recitation hour per week. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 5210. Students who have earned
credit for 5209 will earn only two credits for this course. Prerequisite: either
2212 or 2222 and either 3300 or 3311. [4] (MNS)
CHEM 4230. Physical Organic Chemistry. [Formerly CHEM 222]
Structure and bonding in organic molecules. Reactive intermediates and
organic reaction mechanisms. Prerequisite: 4210. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 4240. Advanced Organic Reactions. [Formerly CHEM 223]
A comprehensive study of organic reactions and their application to the
preparation of small molecules. Prerequisite: 4210. Three lectures per
week. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 4350. Statistical Thermodynamics. Statistical mechanics and
chemical equilibrium. Distribution laws, partition functions, and thermodynamic properties of atoms and molecules. Applications to gases, liquids,
and solids. Prerequisite: either 3300 or 3310, and Math 2300. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 4720. Drug Design and Development. [Formerly CHEM 226]
Concepts of drug design; physical chemistry of drug interactions with receptors, enzymes, and DNA; drug absorption and distribution. Organic
chemistry of drug metabolism; mechanism of action for selected therapeutic classes. Prerequisite: 3710 or BSCI 2520. [3] (MNS)
CHEM 4965. Advanced Integrated Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM 295A]
Multidisciplinary laboratory projects. Experimental design, synthetic techniques, chemical analysis, spectroscopy, and computational methods. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to senior majors. Prerequisite: 2100,
2100L. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 4966. Advanced Integrated Laboratory. [Formerly CHEM
295B] Continuation of 4965. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to
senior majors. Prerequisite: 4965. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 4980. Honors Research. [Formerly CHEM 292B] Open only to
students in the departmental honors program. Original research supervised by research adviser, to be reported in thesis form with oral examination thereon. [2] (No AXLE credit)
CHEM 4999. Honors Research. [Formerly CHEM 292C] Open only to
students in the departmental honors program. Original research supervised by research adviser, to be reported in thesis form with oral examination thereon. [2] (No AXLE credit)

155

Chinese
CHIN 1011. Basic Chinese. [Formerly CHIN 200A] Designed exclusively
for students with no previous exposure to the language. The basic pronunciation, grammar, and writing system of Mandarin Chinese. Simple
conversation, the pinyin Romanization system, basic Chinese characters,
and cultural elements embedded in the language. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Chinese language
course. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CHIN 1012. Basic Chinese. [Formerly CHIN 200B] Continuation of 1011.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 1011. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CHIN 1101. Elementary Chinese I. [Formerly CHIN 201] Introduction
to Modern Chinese pronunciation, grammar, conversation, reading, and
writing. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 1012 or a more advanced Chinese
language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)
CHIN 1102. Elementary Chinese II. [Formerly CHIN 202] Continuation
of 1101. Introduction to Modern Chinese pronunciation, grammar, conversation, reading, and writing. Two hours of lecture and three hours of
drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 1012 or 1101. [5] (INT)
CHIN 1231. Calligraphy. [Formerly CHIN 231] Basic skills of writing standard script kaishu. Basic aesthetic of Chinese calligraphy. No Chinese
language background necessary. [1] (No AXLE credit)
CHIN 2201. Intermediate Chinese I. [Formerly CHIN 211] Oral and
written language training. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill
per week. Repeat credit for students who completed 214. No credit for
students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language
course. Prerequisite: 1102. [5] (INT)
CHIN 2202. Intermediate Chinese II. [Formerly CHIN 212] Continuation
of 2201. Language training in oral and written Chinese. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. Serves as repeat credit for 216. No
credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese
language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [5] (INT)
CHIN 2211. Chinese for Heritage Learners I. [Formerly CHIN 225]
Intended for students who have some informal training in listening and
speaking Mandarin Chinese. Basic literacy and other aspects of language
proficiency. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. [3]
(INT)
CHIN 2212. Chinese for Heritage Learners II. [Formerly CHIN 226]
Continuation of 2211. Intended for students who have some informal training in listening and speaking Mandarin Chinese. Basic literacy and other
aspects of language proficiency. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit
for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 2211. [3] (INT)
CHIN 3301. Advanced Chinese I. [Formerly CHIN 241] Readings in Chinese culture to enhance proficiency in oral and written Chinese. No credit
for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
CHIN 3302. Advanced Chinese II. [Formerly CHIN 242] Continuation
of 3301. Readings in Chinese culture to enhance proficiency in oral and
written Chinese. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT)
CHIN 3302W. Advanced Chinese II. [Formerly CHIN 242W] Reading
and writing essays about modern Chinese culture and society. Repeat
credit for 3302. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced Chinese language course. Graded basis only. Prerequisite:
3301. [3] (INT)
CHIN 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly CHIN 289A] Designed primarily for majors who want to study Chinese not regularly offered in the
curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for a total of
12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment.

A&S

156
[1-3; maximum 12 credits total for all semesters of CHIN 3851 and 3852]
(No AXLE credit)
CHIN 3852. Independent Study. [Formerly CHIN 289B] Designed primarily for majors who want to study Chinese not regularly offered in the
curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for a total of
12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment.
[1-3; maximum 12 credits total for all semesters of CHIN 3851 and 3852]
(No AXLE credit)
CHIN 4401. Business Chinese I. [Formerly CHIN 255] Language skills
for listening, speaking, reading, and writing in business environments.
Modern China from economic and business perspectives. No credit for
students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language
course. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT)
CHIN 4402. Business Chinese II. [Formerly CHIN 256] Continuation of
4401. Language skills for listening, speaking, reading, and writing in business environments. Modern China from economic and business perspectives. Prerequisite: 4401. [3] (INT)
CHIN 4403. Readings in Modern Chinese Media. [Formerly CHIN 251]
Books, newspapers, Internet, and television documents and productions
pertaining to political, social, and economic issues in China, including foreign trade-related issues. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT)
CHIN 4404. Readings in Modern Chinese Media. [Formerly CHIN 252]
Continuation of 4403. Books, newspapers, and Internet sources pertaining to political, social, and cultural issues. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W.
[3] (INT)
CHIN 4405. Classical Chinese Literature and Philosophy. [Formerly
CHIN 253] Classical writings by Confucius, Sunzi, and Zhuangzi. Poems
by Li Bai and Du Fu. Excerpts from The Dream of the Red Chamber. Linguistic comparisons between classical and modern Chinese. Prerequisite:
3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT)
CHIN 4406. Readings in Modern Literary Chinese. [Formerly CHIN
254] 1910 to the present. Chinese literature and poetry. Linguistic transformations that produced modern literary Chinese. Prerequisite: 3302 or
3302W. [3] (INT)

Cinema and Media Arts
CMA 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly CMA 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
CMA 1002W. Moving Images and Analytical Thinking. Moving images and new media from various genres, periods, and national contexts.
May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Offered
on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)
CMA 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly CMA 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
CMA 1500. Fundamentals of Film and Video Production. [Formerly
CMA 105] Technologies and techniques of filmmaking. Digital video cameras, staging and lighting, sound recording, post-production sound, and
image editing. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)
CMA 1600. Introduction to Film and Media Studies. [Formerly CMA
125] Stylistic tendencies and narrative strategies, genres, and theoretical
approaches. Live-action cinema, animation, experimental cinema, television, and computer-generated moving images. [3] (HCA)
CMA 2250. 16mm Filmmaking. Camera operation, lighting, non-sync
sound design, and film pre-production for 16 mm and celluloid film. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite 1500. [3] (No AXLE credit)

vanderbilt university
CMA 2260. Digital Production Workshop. Digital cinematography,
sound design, and editing. Individual and group projects. Offered on a
graded basis only. Prerequisite 1500. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CMA 2300. Film and Media Theory. [Formerly CMA 201] Historical
overview of the major analytical and critical approaches to the study of film
as an aesthetic and cultural form. Contemporary perspectives on cinema,
video, and new media. Prerequisite: 1600. [3] (P)
CMA 2400. History of World Cinema. [Formerly CMA 211] Survey of
world film history from 1895 to the present. Key films and filmmakers.
Historical, aesthetic, national, and political contexts of films and film movements. No credit for students who have earned credit for HART 272a or
272b. Prerequisite: 1600. [3] (HCA)
CMA 2500W. Screenwriting. [Formerly CMA 227W] Techniques of
screenwriting. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed
THTR 227, 227W. [3] (HCA)
CMA 2600W. Advanced Screenwriting. [Formerly FILM 275W] Story
structure, character development, and dialogue. Serves as repeat credit
for THTR 275 and 275W. Prerequisite: 2500W or THTR 227W. [3] (HCA)
CMA 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly CMA 289A] Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed by the director
of Cinema and Media Arts within two weeks of the beginning of classes;
otherwise the student will be dropped from the rolls. [Variable credit: 1-3
each semester. Limit of 6 hours for 3850 and 3851 combined for majors.]
(No AXLE credit)
CMA 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly FILM 289B] Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed by the director
of Cinema and Media Arts within two weeks of the beginning of classes;
otherwise the student will be dropped from the rolls. [Variable credit: 1-3
each semester. Limit of 6 hours for 3850 and 3851 combined for majors.]
(No AXLE credit)
CMA 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly CMA 280B] Under faculty
supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience working
on projects related to film and media in public or private organizations.
Responsibilities include conducting background research and developing skills in film and media study and production. Hours for background
readings and research will be completed in CMA 3881 concurrently with
3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Cinema and Media Arts, and approval of the student’s plan by the director of
undergraduate studies are required. A research paper and report must be
submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training
is completed. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 will not count toward the Film Studies
Major or minor. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit)
CMA 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly CMA 280A]
Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience working on projects related to film and media in public or private
organizations. Responsibilities include conducting background research
and developing skills in film and media study and production. Hours for
background readings and research will be completed in CMA 3881 concurrently with CMA 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of
prior work in Cinema and Media Arts, and approval of the student’s plan
by the director of undergraduate studies are required. A research paper
and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the
internship training is completed. Readings and research conducted under
the supervision of a member of the Cinema and Media Arts program and a
substantial research paper or written project (such as a screenplay, treatment, or production plan related to the Training component) is required.
Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-6] (No AXLE credit)
CMA 3891. Special Topics in Film and Video Production. [Formerly
CMA 288A] Topics vary. May be repeated more than once if there is no
duplication of topic. Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CMA 3892. Special Topics in the Study of Film. [Formerly CMA 288B]
Topics vary. May be repeated more than once if there is no duplication of
topic. [3] (HCA)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
CMA 3893. Special Topics in National Cinema and Movements. Major directors, genres, styles of film-making in a specific national context.
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in
topic. [3] (HCA)
CMA 4961. Senior Seminar on Criticism, Theory, and History. [Formerly CMA 290A] Advanced reading and research in film. Offered on a
graded basis only. Prerequisite:1600 and senior standing. [3] (No AXLE
credit)
CMA 4962. Senior Seminar on Film Practice. [Formerly CMA 290B]
Advanced independent filmmaking, portfolio assembly, and professionalism. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1500 and senior standing. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CMA 4998. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly CMA 299A] Acquisition, reading, and analysis of primary source research material. Open only
to senior honor students. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CMA 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly CMA 299B] Writing a thesis under the supervision of the thesis advisor. Open only to senior honor
students. Prerequisite: 4998. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Classical Hebrew
CHEB 1101. Beginning Classical Hebrew I. Alphabet, basic grammar, and vocabulary. Short readings from the Bible. No credit for students
who have earned credit for a more advanced Classical Hebrew language
course. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CHEB 1102. Beginning Classical Hebrew II. Transition to extensive
reading of the Bible. No credit for students who have earned credit for a
more advanced Classical Hebrew language course. Offered on a graded
basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)
CHEB 2200. Intermediate Classical Hebrew. Review of grammar and
expanding vocabulary. Selected readings in prose and poetry from the
Bible. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced
Classical Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)
CHEB 2300. Ugaritic. Orthography, phonology, morphology, and syntax.
Introduction to approaches of comparative Semitics and historical Hebrew
grammar. Selected readings from various genres illustrating language and
literature of ancient Canaan. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)
CHEB 3010. Historical Hebrew Grammar. Linguistic origins and development within Northwest Semitic subgroup. Phonology, morphology,
and lexicon. Theory and method in historical linguistics and comparative
Semitics. Selected readings in literary, documentary, and epigraphic texts.
Prerequisite: 2200. [3] (HCA)
CHEB 3020. Classical Hebrew Poetry. History and genres of ancient
verse. Selected readings from the Bible, including Job and Psalms. Prerequisite: 2200. [3] (HCA)
CHEB 3030. West Semitic Inscriptions. Orthography, phonology,
morphology, and syntax. Studying Hebrew, Aramaic, Phoenician, and
Moabite epigraphic texts. Theory and method in historical linguistics and
comparative Semitics. Prerequisite: 2200. [3] (HCA)

Classics
CLAS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly CLAS 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
CLAS 1010. Introduction to Mediterranean Studies. History and geography of southern Europe, north Africa, and Near East from Iron Age
through Middle Ages (ca. 1000 BCE-1500 CE). Greeks, Romans, and
related peoples. Abrahamic religions. Case studies in complexity and
change, community and identity, innovation and prosperity, power and
conflict, and environment and cosmos. Cultural transmission and reception. [3] (INT)

157
CLAS 1020. Introduction to Mediterranean Archaeology. Iron Age
through Middle Ages (ca. 1000 BCE-1500 CE). Remains of Greeks, Romans, and related peoples of southern Europe, north Africa, and the Near
East. Society, economy, religion, urbanism. Human settlement and natural environment. Classical and Renaissance paradigms. Modern theory of
material and visual culture. Techniques of data collection, analysis, and
curation [3] (SBS)
CLAS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly CLAS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
CLAS 1120. Greek Civilization. [Formerly CLAS 130] A survey of the
history and achievements of Greece from its Mycenaean origins to the Roman domination. Topics include literature, art, athletics, Periclean Athens,
the conquest of Alexander, and the Hellenistic age. [3] (INT)
CLAS 1130. The Greek Myths. [Formerly CLAS 150] A study of the nature of the Greek myths, with consideration of the related Near Eastern
myths and the early history of myths in Greece. Both the divine and the
heroic myths, with some attention to the development of these myths in
Italy and to their influence upon art and literature. [3] (HCA)
CLAS 1150. Roman Civilization. [Formerly CLAS 146] Ancient Roman
civilization from mythical foundations to the fall of the empire. A historical
survey of topics including art and architecture, city life, agriculture, religion,
law, slavery, public entertainment, and literature. [3] (INT)
CLAS 2100. History of the Ancient Near East. [Formerly CLAS 207]
From the neolithic period to the conquests of Alexander the Great, in the
geographical area from Persia to Troy and Egypt. Special attention to the
history of Israel. [3] (INT)
CLAS 2110. History of Greece to Alexander the Great. [Formerly
CLAS 208] The Greek world from the beginning of the Mycenaean Age
(1650 B.C.) to the end of the Classical period. Special attention to the
relationship between political history and the development of Hellenism.
[3] (INT)
CLAS 2120. Greece and the Near East from Alexander to Constantine. [Formerly CLAS 209] From Alexander’s conquest of the Persian Empire to the ascendancy of Christianity in the fourth century. Social, cultural,
and religious transformations within the framework of political history. [3]
(INT)
CLAS 2150. History of the Roman Republic. [Formerly CLAS 212] The
growth and evolution of the Roman world, from the foundation of the city
in the seventh century B.C. to the reign of Caesar Augustus. The Romans’
unification of Italy, conquest of the Mediterranean and western Europe,
adoption of Hellenism, and overthrow of the Republic. [3] (INT)
CLAS 2160. History of the Roman Empire. [Formerly CLAS 213] The
Roman world from Augustus to the collapse of the western empire in the
fifth century. Political, military, social, and religious history. Special attention given to problems arising from use of the primary sources as well as
to controversies in modern scholarship. [3] (INT)
CLAS 2180. The Mediterranean World from Late Antiquity to the
Middle Ages. [Formerly CLAS 223] Eastern Roman Empire from Constantine to Arab conquests. Political, social, cultural, and religious history,
including monasticism, barbarian invasions, changing roles of Emperor
and Church, and birth of Islam. Developments in urban life and landscape.
[3] (INT)
CLAS 2200. Archaic and Classical Greek Art and Architecture, 1000
to 400 B.C.E.. [Formerly CLAS 204] Sculpture, vase painting, architecture, and the minor arts. Formal and stylistic developments in relation to
changing cultural background. No credit for students who have earned
credit for HART 2220. Repeat credit for students who have completed
HART 257. [3] (HCA)

A&S

158
CLAS 2210. Late Classical Greek and Hellenistic Art and Architecture. [Formerly CLAS 205] Sculpture, vase painting, architecture, and the
minor arts from after the Parthenon to the Roman Empire. Media that developed significantly in this period, such as wall painting and mosaic. No
credit for students who have earned credit for HART 2220. Repeat credit
for students who have completed HART 258. [3] (HCA)
CLAS 2250. Roman Art and Architecture. [Formerly CLAS 206] Sculpture, architecture, and painting from the tenth century B.C.E. to the early
fourth century C.E. Daily life of the Romans as seen in excavations of the
towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum. [3] (HCA)
CLAS 3000. Classical Tradition in America. [Formerly CLAS 222] Influences of classical Greece and Rome on the literature, politics, architecture, and values of the United States from the colonial period to the
present. [3] (US)
CLAS 3010. The Ancient Origins of Religious Conflict in the Middle
East. [Formerly CLAS 224] Religious oppositions in the eastern Mediterranean world from the Maccabean revolt to the Muslim conquests of the
seventh century; beginnings of religious militancy; challenges of monotheism to Greco-Roman civilization; conversion, persecution, and concepts
of heresy and holy war in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. [3] (P)
CLAS 3030. Death, Disease, and Health in the Ancient World. From
the Bronze Age to early Christianity and Late Antiquity. Biological history
of the Greeks, Romans, and other Mediterranean peoples. Changing concepts of death and afterlife; interpretations of disease; medical thought
and practice. Healing, epidemics, natural catastrophe, and dietary variation. Evidence from classical literature, archaeology, bones and teeth. [3]
(SBS)
CLAS 3100. Women, Sexuality, and the Family in Ancient Greece
and Rome. [Formerly CLAS 220] The status and role of women, law and
the regulation of the private sphere, sexuality and gender roles, demography and family structure, marriage, children, religion, domestic architecture and the household economy, ancient critiques of the family, and the
impact of Christianity. [3] (SBS)
CLAS 3110. Warfare in the Ancient Mediterranean. [Formerly CLAS
226] Continuity and change in ancient Greek and Roman warfare 800 B.C.
to A.D. 120. Social, political, and religious aspects of war. Effects of war,
imperialism, and militarism on internal and external populations. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3120. Humor, Ancient to Modern. [Formerly CLAS 225] Ancient
comic forms juxtaposed with modern theories of humor. Aristophanic Old
Comedy, New Comedy, and Satire. Modern parallels. [3] (HCA)
CLAS 3150. Roman Law. [Formerly CLAS 260] The relationship between
law and society as illustrated by cases drawn from Roman legal and literary sources. The development of legal reasoning and the rise of an autonomous legal profession at Rome. [3] (SBS)
CLAS 3160. Roman Law and Social History. Relationship of law and
society as illustrated by legal, literary, epigraphic, and papyrological evidence. Views and methodologies of leading modern scholars. Focus on
methodology. Marriage, family, personal status, the economy, and judicial
system. Basic familiarity with Roman history or law is expected. [3] (SBS)
CLAS 3190W. Augustan Rome. [Formerly CLAS 296W] Social, administrative, religious, and military reforms. Common themes in art, architecture,
and literature; changes in national identity in the transition from Republic to
Empire. Prerequisite: 1150, 2150, or 2160. [3] (HCA)
CLAS 3200. The Greek City. [Formerly CLAS 211] The example of ancient Athens. The stoa, the theatre, the house, and fortifications. Institutions such as the courts, the public assembly, and the family. Literary, historical, archaeological, and philosophical sources. Serves as repeat credit
for students who have completed HART 263. [3] (SBS)
CLAS 3210. The Archaeology of Greek Sanctuaries. [Formerly CLAS
245] Study of ancient Greek religious worship through an examination of
temples, altars, cult images, votives, priests, and processions. Panhellenic
sanctuaries and oracular and mystery cults. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 3700. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3220. The Trojan War in History, Art, and Literature. [Formerly
CLAS 240] Representations in Classical Greek art, literature, and archaeo-

vanderbilt university
logical evidence. The composition of the Homeric epics; the meaning of
the Trojan War to later audiences. [3] (HCA)
CLAS 3230. Alexander the Great. [Formerly CLAS 243] Alexander’s rise
to power and conquests in Europe, Asia, and Africa; the legacy of his introduction of Greek culture to the East; his significance to later audiences.
Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)
CLAS 3300. Akkadian. [Formerly CLAS 231] Introduction to the cuneiform script and to the grammar of Akkadian, the language of ancient Mesopotamia. Selected readings in Old Babylonian (CODEX Hammurabi, Mari
letters) and Neo-Assyrian texts (Creation Poem, Gilgamesh Epic). [3] (INT)
CLAS 3301. Akkadian. [Formerly CLAS 232] Continuation of 3300. Introduction to the cuneiform script and to the grammar of Akkadian, the
language of ancient Mesopotamia. Selected readings in Old Babylonian
(CODEX Hammurabi, Mari letters) and Neo-Assyrian texts (Creation Poem,
Gilgamesh Epic). [3] (INT)
CLAS 3310. Culture of the Ancient Near East. [Formerly CLAS 236]
A survey of highly sophisticated Near East cultures of the last three millennia before the common era (B.C.). Discussion of political histories, and
the social, religious, and intellectual heritage of Mesopotamia, Egypt, and
Anatolia through excavated artifacts and written documents. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3320. The Amarna Age. [Formerly CLAS 238] The Amarna period from the sixteenth through the twelfth centuries B.C.E., as illumined
by excavations of palaces and temples in Egypt, Anatolia, Canaan, and
Mesopotamia as well as the vast historical, legal, and literary documents
of the period. Focus on the internationalism and theological speculation
of the period as seen through the powerful personalities and accomplishments of leaders such as Thutmoses III, Suppiluliumas, Ramses II, and the
spiritually influential Akehnaten. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3350. History of Early and Medieval Christianity. Expansion
from second through fifteenth centuries across the Mediterranean into
Asia, Africa, and Europe. Believers’ practice and doctrine, relationship with
Roman Empire, development of the Church, and social and cultural history of believers from after New Testament into late Middle Ages. Global
perspective. Roots of Catholicism, Protestantism, and Eastern Christianity.
[3] (INT)
CLAS 3360. Early Christian Poetry. Composition and reception of verse
from Late Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages. Historical, cultural, and geographic contexts of religious poetry and hymnody from the New Testament through the 9th century. Greek and Roman models, Christian literary
innovations, and influence on modern writers. Readings in translation from
Syriac, Greek, Latin, and Old English. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3370. History of Syriac Christianity. Christians who spoke the
Aramaic dialect during Late Antiquity to modern times from the Near East
to the Persian Gulf, India, and China. Culture and literature under the
Byzantine Empire and the Islamic States in the Middle East. History and
theology of religious communities. Historiographical debates about Syriac
origins and development. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3380. Desert Spirituality in Early Christianity. Rise of asceticism in Late Antiquity. History and geography of asceticism in Syria and
Egypt. Diversification and spread across the Mediterranean region. Selected readings in translation of sayings, hagiography, theology, and verse.
Legacy in modern belief. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3600. Seminar in the Digital Humanities. Theory, method, and
applications in history, classics, and religious studies. Focus on historical
data and research tools in the study of the Mediterranean world. Integration and manipulation of textual and spatial data. Scholarly interfacing and
public access. New media. Developing research plans. [3] (SBS)
CLAS 3700. Uncovering Greek Religion: Cults, Festivals, and Sanctuaries in the Ancient World. [Formerly CLAS 241] Paganism to Judaism
and early Christianity. Material culture, including architecture, sculpture,
votive dedications, and topography of sanctuaries. Relationship between
religion and culture. Politics, warfare, and athletics. Impact of ancient cults
on modern Greece. Taught in Greece. Offered on a graded basis only. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 3210. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3710. Archaeology, History, and Culture in Greece: Kenchreai
Field School. [Formerly CLAS 242] Archaeological field school at the site

College of Arts and Science / Courses
of Kenchreai with seminars and excursions in southern Greece. Basic
techniques in excavation, survey, and the analysis of architecture, artifacts, and bones. Explorations of churches, temples, houses, and tombs.
Focus on Greece during the Roman Empire and late antiquity. Landscape
settlement, cult practice, cultural and social diversity, and funerary ritual.
Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3720. History and Art of Ancient Rome. [Formerly CLAS 244]
The mid-second century BCE to the mid-second century CE. Investigating
significant sites, monuments, and museum collections in Rome and locations throughout southern Italy. Monumental and domestic architecture,
wall paintings, sculpture, coins, and ancient sources. [3] (INT)
CLAS 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly CLAS 289] Completion of a
substantial research paper in either classics or the classical tradition under
the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and
the director of undergraduate studies is required. May be repeated for a
total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn
only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits
for all semesters of CLAS 3850] (No AXLE credit)
CLAS 4998. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly CLAS 299A] Open only to
seniors in the departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CLAS 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly CLAS 299B] Open only to
seniors in the departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Communication of Science and Technology
CSET 2100. Science Communication Tools and Techniques. [Formerly CSET 201] Translating technical research for a general readership.
Benefits and limitations of different formats, texts, and media for telling stories about science. Repeat credit for students who completed 150 in fall
2011 or fall 2012. No credit for students who earned credit for CMST 237
before fall 2013. [3] (HCA)
CSET 3840. Directed Study. [Formerly CSET 289] Individual research
and scholarly investigation in science, engineering, or medicine. Usually
conducted in a laboratory setting. May be repeated for credit more than
once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
CSET 3841. Project in Science Writing and Communicating. [Formerly CSET 290] Presentation of scientific, engineering, or medical research,
including biographical and historical background where appropriate, in one
or more presentation styles (written, visual, web), under faculty supervision.
May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up
to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 3840 and approval of
the program director. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
CSET 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly CSET 150] Topics as announced.
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (No
AXLE credit)
CSET 4998. Honors Thesis. [Formerly CSET 296] Limited to students
admitted to the Communication of Science and Technology Honors program. May be repeated for credit once, but students may earn only up to
3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 3840 and 3841. [1-3]
(No AXLE credit)

Communication Studies
CMST 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly CMST 99] Topics vary.
General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
CMST 1002. Introduction to Communication Studies. Theoretical
foundations and practice of human communication. Argument and advocacy; public address; and critical analysis of media and culture. [3] (HCA)
CMST 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly CMST 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit

159
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
CMST 1500. Fundamentals of Public Speaking. [Formerly CMST 100]
Theory and practice in speaking before an audience. Problems of preparation, content, organization, language, and delivery are treated. [3] (HCA)
CMST 1850. Interpersonal Communication. [Formerly CMST 101] A
study of both the theory and application of verbal and nonverbal communication as they occur in relatively unstructured person-to-person and
small group settings. [3] (SBS)
CMST 2100. Argumentation and Debate. [Formerly CMST 200] A
course in the practice of debate examining argumentation theory. Emphasis on forms of reasoning and use of evidence in debate. Prerequisite:
1500. [3] (HCA)
CMST 2110. Persuasion. [Formerly CMST 201] The theory and practice
of persuasion with particular emphasis on speech composition, the use of
language and its relationship to oral style, structure, and the relationship
of structure to the process of speech preparation. Prerequisite: 1500. [3]
(HCA)
CMST 2120. Organizational and Managerial Communication. [Formerly CMST 204] Theory and practice of communication in relation to
organizations and management with application to leadership, values and
ethics, organizational communication theory, and organizational conflict.
Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA)
CMST 2800. Rhetoric and Civic Life. [Formerly CMST 210] Public discourse and the duties and prerogatives of citizenship. Theory, models,
and criticism of rhetoric and oratory in their deliberative, forensic, and epideictic settings. [3] (HCA)
CMST 2900. Values in Modern Communication. [Formerly CMST 223]
An examination of values, explicit and implicit, in communication situations
in modern American society. The course begins with the discovery and
analysis of values and applies this process to technological innovation and
rhetorical choice, interpersonal communication, advertising and consumerism, and mass-media persuasion. [3] (P)
CMST 2950. Rhetoric of Mass Media. [Formerly CMST 241] A study
of the nature, effects, reasons for the effects, ethics, regulation, and criticism of contemporary mass media communication. Political causes, news
reporting, commercial advertising, and similar sources of rhetoric are included. [3] (HCA)
CMST 3000. Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1640-1865. [Formerly CMST 220] A critical and historical examination of the methods and
effects of public debate and other attempts to influence the attitudes, affective response, and behavior of the American people. Attention to the
rhetorical features of selected issues and speakers from colonial times
through the Civil War. [3] (US)
CMST 3001. Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1865 to 1945.
[Formerly CMST 221] Critical and historical examination of the methods
and effects of public debate and other attempts to influence the attitudes,
affective response, and behavior of the American people. Attention to the
rhetorical features of selected issues and speakers from 1865 to 1945.
[3] (US)
CMST 3002. Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1945-Present.
[Formerly CMST 225] Critical and historical examination of the methods
and effects of public debate and other attempts to influence the attitudes,
affective response, and behavior of the American people. Attention to the
rhetorical features of selected issues and speakers from 1945 to the present. [3] (US)
CMST 3100. Rhetoric of Social Movements. [Formerly CMST 224] The
role of communication in the creation, development, and function of social
movements. The analysis of specific rhetorical acts. The study of the arguments, patterns of persuasion, and communication strategies of selected
social movements. [3] (US)

A&S

160
CMST 3110. Women, Rhetoric, and Social Change. [Formerly CMST
226] Reform rhetoric of American women from 1790 to 1920. Historical
influences on women’s social activism and emergence on the public platform; rhetorical issues facing women speakers. Rhetorical strategies used
by them as advocates for education, labor, abolition, temperance, and the
Woman Suffrage Movement. [3] (US)
CMST 3120. Rhetoric of U.S. Religion. [Formerly CMST 229] American
religious discourse in historical and contemporary contexts. Religious traditions and influential rhetorical texts. Significant religious controversies.
No credit for students who earned credit for 294 section 1 in fall 2013.
[3] (US)
CMST 3140. Communication and the First Amendment. Principles,
interpretations, and controversies related to the First Amendment of the
United States’ Constitution. Emphasis on freedom of religion, freedom of
speech, and freedom of the press. No credit for students who earned
credit for 294 section 1 in spring 2015. [3] (US)
CMST 3600. The Rhetorical Tradition. [Formerly CMST 222] Development of rhetorical concepts from classical Greece to the present. Significant rhetoricians and texts. The impact of context on rhetoric. [3] (HCA)
CMST 3620. Rhetoric, Culture, and Critique. [Formerly CMST 254]
Rhetorical criticism of cultural texts and artifacts, including oratory, mass
media, and other forms of public discourse. Fundamentals of effective
rhetorical analysis and writing. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3620W. [3] (HCA)
CMST 3620W. Rhetoric, Culture, and Critique. [Formerly CMST
254W] Rhetorical criticism of cultural texts and artifacts, including oratory
and mass media. Fundamentals of rhetorical analysis and writing. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 3620. [3] (HCA)
CMST 3700. Politics and Mass Media. [Formerly CMST 244] Impact
of mass-mediated communication on U.S. electoral politics. Pragmatic
and ethical influences on the dissemination of information to voters during
campaigns. [3] (HCA)
CMST 3710. Cultural Rhetorics of Film. [Formerly CMST 243] Film as
rhetorical response to historical and cultural change. Filmic treatment of
historical trauma; related genres, such as horror and melodrama. [3] (HCA)
CMST 3720. Communicating Gender. [Formerly CMST 235] Dominant
modes of communicating gender ideology. Effects on policy, politics, and
popular culture. Includes theories of rhetoric, gender, sexuality, race, and
social class. [3] (P)
CMST 3740. Rhetoric of Medicine and Health. Cultural construction of
medicine and health through narratives, metaphors, and bodily practices.
Case studies in art, ethics, activism, and public controversy. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3890 section 1 offered spring 2016.
[3] (P)
CMST 3840. Directed Readings. [Formerly CMST 290] Supervised
reading and writing in a selected field of the discipline under the guidance
of a faculty supervisor. Consent of both the faculty supervisor and the
director of undergraduate studies required. Normally open only to majors
in communication studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3850
and 3840 combined, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of
CMST 3850 and 3840] (No AXLE credit)
CMST 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly CMST 289] A research project in rhetorical criticism to be arranged with the individual instructor. Designed for students who have taken either 3000 or 3001. May be repeated
for a total of 6 credits in 3850 and 3840 combined, but students may earn
only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of CMST 3850 and 3840] (No AXLE credit)
CMST 3890. Selected Topics in Communication Studies. [Formerly
CMST 294] May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course
each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
CMST 4940. Seminars in Selected Topics. [Formerly CMST 295] Topics of special interest. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 4940 and

vanderbilt university
4941 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 15 hours of Communication Studies. [3; maximum of 6 credits total
for all semesters of CMST 4940 and 4941] (No AXLE credit)
CMST 4941. Seminars in Selected Topics. [Formerly CMST 296] Topics of special interest. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 4940 and
4941 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 15 hours of Communication Studies. [3; maximum of 6 credits total
for all semesters of CMST 4940 and 4941] (No AXLE credit)

Creole
CREO 1101. Elementary Creole I (Duke). Haitian Creole or Kreyòl language. Vocabulary and idioms. Haitian culture. Understanding, speaking,
reading, and writing in contexts of health care, Haitian women’s rights,
and unpaid child servants (restavèk). Offered on a graded basis only. [3]
(No AXLE credit)
CREO 1102. Elementary Creole II (Duke). Essential elements of Creole language and aspects of Haitian culture. Speaking, listening, reading,
and writing. Exposure to Haitian culture through films, storytelling, games,
music, and proverbs. Prerequisite: 1101 or a comparable level of previous
Creole language experience, such as familial background in Creole. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)
CREO 2201. Intermediate Creole I (Duke). Understanding, speaking,
reading, and writing in cultural context; issues of rural life in Haiti, religion,
Frenchified Creole vs popular Creole. Texts, poems, novel excerpts. Focus on contemporary events and debates in Haitian culture. Offered on a
graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)
CREO 2202. Intermediate Creole II (Duke). Second semester of Intermediate Creole. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201 or
equivalent. [3] (INT)

Earth and Environmental Sciences
EES 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly EES 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
EES 1030. Oceanography. [Formerly EES 103] An introduction to the
geology, biology, chemistry, and physics of the marine environment. [3]
(MNS)
EES 1030L. Oceanography Laboratory. [Formerly EES 113] Laboratory
to accompany 1030. Corequisite: 1030. One three-hour laboratory per
week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with
1030. [1] (No AXLE credit)
EES 1070. Volcanoes: Impacts on Earth and Society. [Formerly EES
107] How magmas form and volcanoes erupt; eruption processes and
their hazards to society. Volcanic influence on human history and the evolution of the Earth. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1111
section 3. [3] (MNS)
EES 1080. Earth and Atmosphere. [Formerly EES 108] The science of
the atmosphere: principles of weather and climate; the atmosphere as
part of the Earth system; weather forecasting; hurricanes, tornadoes, and
severe storms; human impacts, such as air pollution and climate change.
[3] (P)
EES 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly EES 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
EES 1140. Ecology, Evolution, and Climates through Time. [Formerly EES 114] Biological responses to global climate and environmental
change through geologic time. Causes of climate change and its impact

College of Arts and Science / Courses

161

on biodiversity, including extinction implications. Interactions between climate, environments, and the evolution of organisms, emphasizing vertebrates during the past 65 million years. [3] (MNS)

have earned credit for 2110 will earn only one credit hour for this course.
Prerequisite: one of 1030, 1080, 1510, BSCI 1510, CHEM 1601, ECON
1010, ES 1401 or PHYS 1501, 1601, 1901. [4] (MNS)

EES 1400. Iceland’s Geology. [Formerly EES 140] Processes that shape
Icelandic landscapes. Volcanoes, glaciers, rivers, ocean, climate. History
of interaction between the environment and Icelanders. Introduction at
Vanderbilt, two weeks Icelandic field experience; laboratory includes both
classroom and field work. Prerequisite: 1510, 1070, or 1111. [4] (MNS)

EES 3330. Sedimentology. [Formerly EES 230] The origin and composition of sedimentary particles, their transportation to the site of deposition,
actual deposition, and the processes involved in lithifying sediments into
solid rock. Emphasis on interpretation of ancient source areas and depositional environments. Terrigenous, carbonate, and other rock types will
be studied. Field trips. Three lectures and one laboratory period. No credit
for graduate students in EES. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2510.[4] (MNS)

EES 1510. The Dynamic Earth: Introduction to Geological Sciences.
[Formerly EES 101] Processes that have changed the earth. Relation between these processes and their products (e.g., earthquakes, minerals
and rocks, mountains, oceanic features); interactions between processes
affecting the solid, liquid, and gaseous components of earth; impact on
humans. [3] (MNS)
EES 1510L. Dynamic Earth Laboratory. [Formerly EES 111] Laboratory
to accompany 1510. Corequisite: 1510. One three-hour laboratory per
week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with
1510. [1] (No AXLE credit)
EES 2110. Global Climate Change. [Formerly EES 201] Science and
policy of global climate change: history and causes of climate change in
Earth’s past, with emphasis on the last 2 million years; evidence of human
impacts on climate since 1850; future climate change and its economic,
social, and ecological consequences; economic, technological, and public
policy responses. Prerequisite: 1510 or 1080. [3] (MNS)
EES 2150. Science, Risk, and Policy. [Formerly EES 205] Assessment
and management of deadly risks: comparison of markets, regulatory
agencies, and courts for managing risks; cultural and scientific construction of risk; psychology of risk perception; case studies such as Hurricane
Katrina, mad cow disease, and air pollution. [3] (P)
EES 2510. Earth Systems through Time. [Formerly EES 202] Effects of
feedbacks between the geologic cycles on the lithosphere, hydrosphere,
biosphere, and atmosphere at diverse intervals in the Earth’s history. Present and future implications. Interpretations of evidence recorded in Earth
materials. Three hours of lecture and one laboratory per week. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 1020. Prerequisite: 1510 and
1510L. [4] (MNS)
EES 2550. Earth Materials. [Formerly EES 225, EES 3250] Solid materials that make up the earth: rock, soil, and sediment, with emphasis on
the minerals that are their major constituents. Hand specimen, optical,
and X-ray methods of description and identification. Physical and chemical
processes that form and modify earth materials and the use of these materials in interpreting earth processes of the past and present. Field trips.
Three lectures and one laboratory per week. Prerequisite: 1030, 1080, or
1510. [4] (MNS)
EES 3220. Life Through Time. [Formerly EES 220] Ecology, classification, and evolution of important groups of fossils, emphasizing invertebrates. Change in marine ecosystems through geologic time. Causes and
effects of rapid evolution events and mass extinctions. Three hours of lecture and one laboratory period per week. Prerequisite: 1510, BSCI 1100,
or BSCI 1511. [4] (MNS)
EES 3260. Petrology. [Formerly EES 226] Nature, distribution, and theories of origin of igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks. Mineralogy
as a function of rock-forming conditions. Laboratory emphasis on description and interpretation of rocks, using hand sample and microscope techniques. Field trips. Three lectures and one laboratory period per week.
Prerequisite: 3250. [4] (MNS)
EES 3280. Environmental Geochemistry. Chemistry of Earth’s surface
including the interaction of solids, liquids, and gases. Earth’s biogeochemical cycles. Natural and anthropogenic transformations in the Critical Zone.
Collection and analysis of environmental samples in the field. Prerequisite
2150. [4] (MNS)
EES 3310. Global Climate Change. Scientific principles and policy applications. Earth’s past; evidence of human impact; future climate change;
and economic, social, and ecological consequences. Economic, technological, and public policy responses. Repeat credit for 2110. Students who

EES 3340. Structural Geology and Rock Mechanics. [Formerly EES
240] Principles of rock deformation; mechanics, fractures, folds, foliation,
primary structures, applications of principles. Interactions and feedbacks
between tectonics, climate, and erosion. Field trips. Two lectures and one
laboratory period per week. Prerequisite: 2510. [4] (MNS)
EES 3841. Directed Study. [Formerly EES 289A] Readings in related
fields and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open
to senior majors and graduate students or by consent of the department
chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 2 credits per semester of enrollment.
[1-2] (No AXLE credit)
EES 3842. Directed Study. [Formerly EES 289B] Readings in related
fields and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open
to senior majors and graduate students or by consent of the department
chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 2 credits per semester of enrollment.
[1-2] (No AXLE credit)
EES 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly EES 291A] Readings with related field and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open to
senior majors and graduate students. Other students must have consent
of department chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for
the major. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of
enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
EES 3852. Independent Study. [Formerly EES 291B] Readings with related field and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open to
senior majors and graduate students. Other students must have consent
of department chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for
the major. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of
enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
EES 3865. Field Investigations. [Formerly EES 210] Content varies according to location and disciplinary focus. May be repeated for credit more
than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course each semester. [3] (MNS)
EES 3891. Special Topics. [Formerly EES 290] Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once by permission of the director of undergraduate studies. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course each semester. Prerequisite: 1510. [3] (No AXLE credit)
EES 4420. Geomorphology. [Formerly EES 261] Analysis of the Earth’s
landforms, their morphology, history, and the processes that form them.
The building of relief and its subsequent transformation by geologic processes on hillslopes, rivers, coasts, wetlands, and glaciers. The natural
history and human impacts on land forms. Field trips. Familiarity with basic
physics (mechanics) is expected. Prerequisite: 1510. [3] (MNS)
EES 4550. Transport Processes in Earth and Environmental Systems. [Formerly EES 255] Principles of conservation and constitutive
transport laws; classic and emerging styles of modeling natural systems.
Prior study of basic calculus (functions, derivatives, integrals) and physics
(mechanics) is expected. Prerequisite: senior or graduate standing with a

A&S

162
major in Earth and Environmental Sciences, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics, or the School of Engineering. [3] (MNS)
EES 4600. Geochemistry. [Formerly EES 260] Application of chemistry
to study the distribution and cycling of elements in the crust of the earth.
Includes chemical bonding and crystallization, phase rules and phase
diagrams, chemical equilibria, theories on the origin of elements, earth,
ocean, atmosphere, and crust. Prerequisite: 3250 and CHEM 1602. [3]
(MNS)
EES 4650. Physics of the Climate System. Physical processes affecting the climate system. Global energy balance of Earth and planets. Surface temperature and how it is regulated. Electromagnetic radiation and
its interaction with atmospheric gases, clouds, and aerosols. Ocean heat
storage, cloud and precipitation processes, and the impact of sea and
inland ice on temperature. Processes that govern the water and carbon
cycle. No credit for students who have earned credit for 290-01 offered
spring 2014 or spring 2015. [3] (MNS)
EES 4680. Paleoclimates. [Formerly EES 268] Fluctuations in Earth’s
climate with an emphasis on the past 700 million years. Forcings and feedback that influence climate and drive change. Techniques used to reconstruct past climate change using marine and terrestrial geologic deposits
and geochronologic methods. Prerequisite: 1510 and 2510. [3] (MNS)
EES 4750. Sustainability: An Environmental Science Perspective.
[Formerly EES 275] Principles, problems, and solutions of environmental
sustainability, with a focus on the links among the environment, society,
and economy. Prerequisite: junior standing. [3] (MNS)
EES 4760. Agent- and Individual-Based Computational Modeling.
Applications in natural, social, and behavioral sciences and engineering.
Designing, programming, and documenting models. Using models for experiments. Examples from environmental science, ecology, economics,
urban planning, and medicine. Familiarity with basic statistics and proficiency in algebra are expected. [3] (MNS)
EES 4820. Paleoecological Methods. [Formerly EES 282] Tools used
to interpret past environments and climates, including plant microfossils,
pollen and phytoliths, vertebrate morphology, and dental microwear and
mesowear. Geochemical tools such as stable isotopes and rare earth elements. Integrating methods for paleontological and anthropological studies, including the use of databases and meta-analyses. Readings from
primary sources. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 390
section 4 in spring 2010. Prerequisite: 1510. [3] (MNS)
EES 4830. Volcanic Processes. [Formerly EES 285] Nature, behavior,
and origin of volcanoes. Magmatic processes that lead to eruptions. Eruptive processes and volcano construction. Impacts of volcanism on Earth’s
surface environment. Prerequisite: 3260. [3] (MNS)
EES 4961. Senior Seminar. [Formerly EES 299] Integrating concepts
and information from diverse fields. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to seniors in the final semester of the major. [1] (No AXLE credit)
EES 4996. Senior Honors Seminar I. Research methods and scientific
writing and communication, including work towards senior honors project,
thesis, and oral presentation. Open only to senior departmental honors
candidates. Does not count toward minimum requirements for major.
Corequisite: 4998 [1] (No Axle Credit)
EES 4998. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly EES 292A] Independent
research under faculty supervision that culminates in an oral presentation
and written thesis submitted to the faculty. Open only to departmental
honors candidates. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the
major. [2] (No AXLE credit)
EES 4999. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly EES 292B] Independent
research under faculty supervision that culminates in an oral presentation
and written thesis submitted to the faculty. Open only to departmental
honors candidates. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the
major. [2] (No AXLE credit)

vanderbilt university

Economics
ECON 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ECON 99] Topics vary.
General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 1010. Principles of Macroeconomics. [Formerly ECON 100]
The role of scarcity and prices in allocating resources. National income,
fluctuations in unemployment and price level, monetary and fiscal policy.
[3] (SBS)
ECON 1020. Principles of Microeconomics. [Formerly ECON 101] The
behavior of households and business in markets. Competition, monopoly,
and rivalry in product and factor markets. Equilibrium. Income distribution.
International trade. Prerequisite: 1010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly ECON 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
ECON 1500. Economic Statistics. [Formerly ECON 150] The use of
quantitative data in understanding economic phenomena. Probability,
sampling, inference, and regression analysis. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 1510. Prerequisite: Math 1100, 1200, or 1300. [3]
(SBS)
ECON 1510. Intensive Economic Statistics. [Formerly ECON 155]
Quantitative techniques in economic analysis. Probability sampling, inference, and multiple regression. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 1500. Prerequisite: MATH 1100, 1200 or 1300. [3] (SBS)
ECON 2100. Labor Economics. [Formerly ECON 212] Introduction to
labor markets in the United States. Foundations and applications of labor
supply and demand, immigration and immigration policies, investment in
human capital, wage policies of employers, minimum wage legislation, labor market discrimination and remedial programs, effects of labor unions,
and unemployment. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 2150. Economic History of the United States. [Formerly ECON
226] Economic development of the United States from the Colonial period
to the present. Interrelated changes in economic performance, technology, institutions, and governmental policy. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020.
[3] (US)
ECON 2160. Strategic Analysis. [Formerly ECON 235] Introduction to
sequential and simultaneous games. Backward induction, equilibrium,
pure and mixed strategies. Cooperation and conflict, the prisoner’s dilemma, threats, promises, and credibility. Brinkmanship, uncertainty, the role
of information, auction design, bidding strategies, and bargaining. Voting
and agenda control. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 2170. Environmental Economics. [Formerly ECON 228] Public
policies to address market failures. Energy policy, climate change, biodiversity, globalization, and population growth. Sustainable economic activity, recycling, valuing environmental amenities, addressing ethical dilemmas, and resolving disputes. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite:
1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 2180. Sports Economics. [Formerly ECON 242] Intercollegiate
and professional sports leagues. Competitive balance, player labor markets, and owner capital markets. Theories of league expansion, rival
leagues, franchise relocation, and sports venue finance. Comparisons of
international sports leagues. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 270. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020.
[3] (SBS)
ECON 2220. Latin American Development. [Formerly ECON 222] Economic growth and structural change. Historical legacies, import-substitution, debt crisis, inflation, and macroeconomic stabilization. Regional and
national economic integration, migration, and conflict. Poverty, inequality,
and policies. No credit for graduate students in economics. Prerequisite:
1010. [3] (SBS)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
ECON 2260. International Economics. Causes, consequences, and
conduct of economic interactions among sovereign nations. Trade in
goods and services; international monetary and financial interactions; winners and losers; exchange rates and the balance of payments; economic
organizations. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1010 and
1020. [3] (SBS).
ECON 2300. Money and Banking. [Formerly ECON 209] A study of
commercial banks and other intermediaries between savers and investors
in the United States, including the government’s role as money creator,
lender, and regulator of private credit, and the effects of financial institutions on aggregate economic activity. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3]
(SBS)
ECON 2340. Plunder and Pillage: The Economics of Warfare and
Conflict. [Formerly ECON 230] International and domestic economic
conflict. Offensive and defensive strategies. Fortifications, strategic bombing, and conscription. Corporate takeovers, bargaining failures, and labor
strikes. Prerequisites: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 2350. Health Care Policy. [Formerly ECON 221] Health care markets in the United States. Supply and demand, social insurance policies,
pharmaceuticals, malpractice, and health care reform. Prerequisite: 1010
and 1020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 2890. Special Topics. [Formerly ECON 249] Topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 3010. Intermediate Microeconomic Theory. [Formerly ECON
231] Development of the techniques of analysis for problems of resource
allocation. Theories of choice and production for individual economic
agents in competitive and monopolistic environments. Behavior of markets. Determination of prices, wages, interest, rent, and profit. Income
distribution. No credit for graduate students in economics. Prerequisite:
1010, 1020, and either MATH 1100, 1200, or 1300. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3012. Microeconomics. Consumer choice and firm behavior
from the fundamentals of preference and production theory. Calculusbased optimization. Price-determination, analysis of market equilibrium,
perfect competition and the effect of market power in monopolies and
oligopolies. Efficiency, welfare, and market failures. No credit for students
who have completed 3010. Prerequisite: 1010, 1020, and either MATH
1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3020. Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory. [Formerly ECON
232] National income accounting and analysis. Classical, Keynesian, and
contemporary models determining national income, employment, liquidity, price level, and economic growth. No credit for graduate students in
economics. Prerequisite: 1010, 1020, and either MATH 1100, 1200, or
1300. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3022. Macroeconomics. Contemporary models of national income, employment, interest rates, price level, and economic growth. Decisions underlying consumption and investment behavior, as well as the
effect of government policies. No credit for students who have completed
3020. Prerequisite: 1010, 1020, and either MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3032. Applied Econometrics. Quantitative economic analysis
with emphasis on multivariate regression. Measurement, specification, estimation, inference, prediction, and interpretation of econometric models.
Experience with data and computer applications. No credit for students
who have completed 3035 or 3050. Prerequisite: 1020; either 1500, 1510,
or both MATH 2820L and either MATH 2810 or 2820; and either Math
1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3035. Econometric Methods. Properties and problems in estimating economic relationships with multiple regression. Statistical and
econometric theory to address empirical questions. Hands-on experience
with economic data analysis with programming in statistical software. No
credit for students who have completed 3032 or 3050. Prerequisite: 1020,
either 1500, 1510, or both MATH 2820L and either MATH 2810 or 2820;
and either Math 1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS)

163
ECON 3050. Introduction to Econometrics. [Formerly ECON 253]
Quantitative methods of economic analysis. Measurement, specification,
estimation, and interpretation of economic models. Econometric computation using microcomputers. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 3032 or 3035. Not offered after AY 2019-20. Prerequisite: 3010
or 3012 and either 1500 or 1510; or MATH 2820L with either MATH 2810
or MATH 2820. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3100. Wages, Employment, and Labor Markets. [Formerly
ECON 251] Theories of wages and employment, dual labor markets, internal labor markets, and labor’s share of national income. Empirical studies
of labor mobility, the effects of unions on relative wages and resource allocation, occupational and industrial wage differentials, and selected labor
markets. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3110. Poverty and Discrimination. [Formerly ECON 267] Theories and empirical evidence concerning inequality, poverty, and discrimination, and their relationship to economic growth. Evaluation of anti-poverty
and anti-discrimination policies. Prerequisite: 3010 and either 1500, 1510,
3050, or MATH 2821. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3150. Topics in the Economic History of the U.S. [Formerly
ECON 266] Analysis of major issues and debates in American economic
history. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (US)
ECON 3160. Economic History of Europe. [Formerly ECON 271]
Sources of Western European economic progress. Organization of overseas merchant empires, origins of the Industrial Revolution, the role of
property rights, demographic patterns, and changing living standards.
Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3200. Public Finance. [Formerly ECON 254] Theories of the state
and collective decisions, fiscal federalism, public goods and externalities.
Tax theory: equity, efficiency, and growth. Taxation of goods, factors, and
corporations. Cost-benefit analysis. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3230. Urban Economics. [Formerly ECON 279] Urban growth,
development of suburbs, location of firms, housing markets, transportation, property taxes, and local government services. Offered on a graded
basis only. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3250. Industrial Organization. [Formerly ECON 274] Models of
market structure and behavior from monopoly and oligopoly to perfect
competition. Strategic interaction between a firm and its customers and
between a firm and its competitors. Firm practices and government policies that promote or hinder the efficient operation of markets. Offered on
a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3270. Economics of Information and Communications Technology. The Internet, cloud computing, social networks, e-commerce,
and Internet telephony as influencers of commerce and consumer welfare. Streaming content, big data, informatics, and open source software
in economic perspective. Property rights, competition, and regulation in
cyberspace. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3893-01
offered spring 2016 or 293-01 offered spring 2015. Prerequisite: 3010.
[3] (SBS)
ECON 3300. Financial Instruments and Markets. [Formerly ECON
259] Theoretical and empirical approaches to the analysis of monetary and
other financial instruments. Portfolio analysis, interest rate risk, and financial futures and options markets. Prerequisite: 3010 and 3020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3330. Economics of Risk. Decision making under risk and uncertainty. Expected utility, risk aversion, and the value of information. Investments, insurance, and lotteries. Moral hazard and adverse selection.
Prospect theory. No credit for students who have earned credit for 389301 offered fall 2016. Prerequisite: 3010 with either 1500 or 1510; or Math
2820L with either Math 2810 or Math 2820. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3350. Economics of Health. [Formerly ECON 268] Demand for
health and health care. Value of health, life, and medical innovation. Health
insurance. Supply and organization of health care services. U.S. health
care reforms. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3600. International Trade. [Formerly ECON 263] International
trade in goods and services. Patterns of trade; gains and losses from
trade, tariffs, and other commercial policies; economic integration; and

A&S

164
international factor movements. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 7600. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3610. International Finance. [Formerly ECON 264] Economics
of international monetary, financial, and macroeconomic relationships. Effects of monetary and fiscal politics in open economies, balance of payments, exchange rate determination, and international monetary institutions. Prerequisite: 3020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3650. Development Economics. [Formerly ECON 288] Determinants of national economic growth for pre-industrial and newly industrial
countries. Inequality and poverty. Imperfect credit markets and microfinance. Political constraints and corruption. Policy issues relevant to developing economics. Prerequisite: 3010 and either 1500, 1510, 3050, or
MATH 2821. [3] (INT)
ECON 3698. Junior Honors Research. Honors thesis proposal under
the supervision of a thesis adviser and the Director of Honors. Open only
to junior majors with the approval of the Director of Honors. Prerequisite:
3010. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 3700. Economic Growth. [Formerly ECON 281] Determinants of
macroeconomic growth. Mathematical theories of exogenous and endogenous growth. Comparison of growth rates across countries and time.
The effect of growth rates on economic well-being. The effect of tax rates.
No credit for students who earned credit for 294 section 1 in spring 2013.
Prerequisite: 3010 and 3020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 3851. Independent Study in Economics. [Formerly ECON
291A] A program of independent reading in economics, arranged in consultation with an adviser. Limited to students having written permission
from an instructor and the director of undergraduate studies. Prerequisite:
3010. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, or 1-6 for departmental honors
candidates; maximum of 12 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined for departmental honors students; maximum of 6 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined
for other students] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 3852. Independent Study in Economics. [Formerly ECON
291B] A program of independent reading in economics, arranged in consultation with an adviser. Limited to students having written permission
from an instructor and the director of undergraduate studies. Prerequisite:
3010. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, or 1-6 for departmental honors
candidates; maximum of 12 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined for departmental honors students; maximum of 6 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined
for other students] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 3893. Selected Microeconomic Topics. [Formerly ECON 293]
Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course
each semester. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 3894. Selected Macroeconomic Topics. [Formerly ECON 294]
Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course
each semester. Prerequisite: 3020. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 4050. Topics in Econometrics. [Formerly ECON 284] Emphasis
on applications. May include generalized method of moments, empirical
likelihood, resampling methods, and nonparametric techniques. Prerequisite: 3050. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4110. Macroeconomic Models for Policy Analysis. [Formerly
ECON 265] Mathematical models of overlapping generations, rational
expectations, and open economies with price rigidities applied to social
security, government debt, exchange rates, monetary policy, and time inconsistent optimal policy. Prerequisite: 3020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4210. Law and Economics. [Formerly ECON 285] The influence
of legal rules and institutions on the behavior of individuals and on economic efficiency and equity. Applications from civil procedure as well as
property, contract, tort, and criminal law. Offered on a graded basis only.
Prerequisite: 3010 and either 1500, 1510, 3050, or MATH 2821. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4220. Social Choice Theory. [Formerly ECON 255] Strategic and
non-strategic social choice theory. Preference aggregation, formal models
of voting, and matching. Prerequisite: 3010 or PHIL 3003 or any Mathematics course numbered 2500 or above. [3] (SBS)

vanderbilt university
ECON 4260. Game Theory with Economic Applications. [Formerly
ECON 273] Rational decision-making in non-cooperative, multi-person
games. Single play and repeated games with complete and incomplete
information. Economic applications of games, such as auctions, labormanagement bargaining, pricing and output decisions in oligopoly, and
common property resources. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4510. Seminar in Macroeconomic Policy. [Formerly ECON 256]
Intensive study of three or four current problems in economic policy. Studies in topics such as macroeconomic policy for the year ahead, financial
market issues, international economic policy issues. Repeat credit for students who have completed 4510W. Limited to majors in economics and
public policy. Prerequisite: 3010 and 3020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4510W. Seminar in Macroeconomic Policy. [Formerly ECON
256W] Intensive study of three or four current problems in economic policy. Studies in topics such as macroeconomic policy for the year ahead, financial market issues, international economic policy issues. Repeat credit
for students who have completed 4510. Limited to majors in economics
and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010 and 3020. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4520W. Seminar on Globalization. [Formerly ECON 260W]
Causes of global economic integration. Winners and losers. World Trade
Organization, international environmental treaties, labor and capital markets. U.S. leadership. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who earned credit for 257W in spring 2009. Prerequisite: 3010 and
either 1500, 1510, 3050, or MATH 2821. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4530. Seminar in Microeconomic Policy. [Formerly ECON 257]
Intensive study of three or four current problems in microeconomic policy.
Repeat credit for students who have completed 4530W. Limited to majors
in economics and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4530W. Seminar in Microeconomic Policy. [Formerly ECON
257W] Intensive study of three or four current problems in microeconomic
policy. Repeat credit for students who have completed 4530. Limited to
majors in economics and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4540W. Economics of Conflict. [Formerly ECON 277W] Economic relationships that appropriate value from other parties. War, crime,
litigation, family quarrels, and rent-seeking. The visible hand, principalagent problems, and negative sum games. Serves as repeat credit for
students who completed 257W section 3 in spring 2010 and section 1 in
fall 2010. Prerequisite: 3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4550. Seminar in Sports Economics. [Formerly ECON 280] Issues and debates. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2180,
3010. [3] (SBS)
ECON 4981. Honors Seminar. [Formerly ECON 295A] Discussion of
selected topics and senior thesis research. Open only to seniors in the
departmental honors program. Prerequisite: 3010. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 4982. Honors Seminar. [Formerly ECON 295B] Discussion of
selected topics and senior thesis research. Open only to seniors in the
departmental honors program. Prerequisite: 3010. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ECON 4998. Senior Thesis. [Formerly ECON 292A] Limited to and required of all candidates for departmental honors. Prerequisite: 3010. [1-3]
(No AXLE credit)
ECON 4999. Senior Thesis. [Formerly ECON 292B] Limited to and required of all candidates for departmental honors. Prerequisite: 3010. [1-3]
(No AXLE credit)

English
ENGL 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ENGL 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 1100. Composition. [Formerly ENGL 100] For students who need
to improve their writing. Emphasis on writing skills, with some analysis of
modern nonfiction writing. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly ENGL 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,

College of Arts and Science / Courses
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)

165
ENGL 2318W. World Literature, Classical. [Formerly ENGL 236W]
Great Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing
ideologies: Classical Greece through the Renaissance. Repeat credit for
students who have completed 2318. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 1210W. Prose Fiction: Forms and Techniques. [Formerly ENGL
104W] Close study of short stories and novels and written explication of
these forms. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 2319. World Literature, Modern. [Formerly ENGL 237] Great
Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing ideologies: The 17th century to the contemporary period. Repeat credit for
students who have completed 2319W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 1220W. Drama: Forms and Techniques. [Formerly ENGL 105W]
Close study of representative plays of the major periods and of the main
formal categories (tragedy, comedy) and written explication of these
forms. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 2319W. World Literature, Modern. [Formerly ENGL 237W] Great
Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing ideologies: The 17th century to the contemporary period. Repeat credit for
students who have completed 2319. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 1230W. Literature and Analytical Thinking. [Formerly ENGL
102W] Close reading and writing in a variety of genres drawn from several
periods. Productive dialogue, persuasive argument, and effective prose
style. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 2320. Southern Literature. [Formerly ENGL 212] The works of
Southern writers from Captain Smith to the present. Topics such as the
Plantation Myth, slavery and civil war, Agrarianism, and “post-southernism.” Authors may include Poe, Twain, Cable, Faulkner, Welty, Percy,
Wright. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 1240. Beginning Nonfiction Workshop. Writing various forms of
prose nonfiction. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 1250W. Introduction to Poetry. [Formerly ENGL 116W] Close
study and criticism of poems. The nature of poetry, and the process of
literary explication. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 1260W. Introduction to Literary and Cultural Analysis. [Formerly ENGL 118W] Analysis of a range of texts in social, political, and
aesthetic contexts. Interdisciplinary study of cultural forms as diverse as
poetry, advertisement, and film. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 1270W. Introduction to Literary Criticism. [Formerly ENGL
117W] Selected critical approaches to literature. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 1280. Beginning Fiction Workshop. [Formerly ENGL 122] Introduction to the art of writing prose fiction. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 1290. Beginning Poetry Workshop. [Formerly ENGL 123] Introduction to the art of writing poetry. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 1300W. Intermediate Composition. [Formerly ENGL 120W] A
writing course including the analysis of essays from a variety of disciplines.
[3] (HCA)
ENGL 2200. Foundations of Literary Study. [Formerly ENGL 199] Fundamentals of literary study: close reading; analytic writing; historical context; abstract reasoning in theory; creative expression. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 2310. Representative British Writers. [Formerly ENGL 208A]
Selections from British literature with attention to contexts and literary periods. From the beginnings to 1660. Provides a broad background for
more specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering
advanced studies in literature. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 3210. Intermediate Nonfiction Writing. [Formerly ENGL 200] Instruction in the forms and techniques of nonfiction writing. Admission by
consent of instructor. May be repeated once for credit. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3215. The Art of Blogging. Conventions of the rapidly evolving
literary form of blogging. Creation and maintenance of a personal blog.
Critique of online journalism across many genres, including activism, politics, science, and arts and culture. Interaction with professional bloggers.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 200-03 offered fall 2014
or for 200-02 offered fall 2013. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3220. Advanced Nonfiction Writing. [Formerly ENGL 201] Further instruction in the form and techniques of nonfiction writing. Admission
by consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit once if there is no
duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of
ENGL 3220] (HCA)
ENGL 3230. Intermediate Fiction Workshop. [Formerly ENGL 204]
Instruction in fiction writing. Supplementary readings that illustrate traditional aspects of prose fiction. Admission by consent of instructor. May be
repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may
enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum
of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3230] (HCA)
ENGL 3240. Advanced Fiction Workshop. [Formerly ENGL 205] Continuing instruction in fiction writing. Admission by consent of instructor.
May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students
may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3240] (HCA)

ENGL 2311. Representative British Writers. [Formerly ENGL 208B]
Selections from British literature with attention to contexts and literary periods. From 1660 to the present. Provides a broad background for more
specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering advanced studies in literature. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 3250. Intermediate Poetry Workshop. [Formerly ENGL 206] Instruction in poetry writing. Supplementary readings illustrating traditional
aspects of poetry. Admission by consent of instructor. May be repeated
for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6
credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3250] (HCA)

ENGL 2316. Representative American Writers. [Formerly ENGL 211]
Selections from the entire body of American literature with attention to
contexts and literary periods. Provides a broad background for more
specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering advanced studies in literature. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2316W. [3] (US)

ENGL 3260. Advanced Poetry Workshop. [Formerly ENGL 207] Continuing instruction in poetry writing. Admission by consent of instructor.
May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students
may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3260] (HCA)

ENGL 2316W. Representative American Writers. [Formerly ENGL
211W] Selections from the entire body of American literature with attention to contexts and literary periods. Provides a broad background for
more specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering
advanced studies in literature. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2316. [3] (US)
ENGL 2318. World Literature, Classical. [Formerly ENGL 236] Great
Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing ideologies: Classical Greece through the Renaissance. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2318W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL 3280. Literature and the Craft of Writing. [Formerly ENGL 202]
The forms and techniques of creative writing. Contemporary practices in
fiction and poetry in historical context. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3310. Anglo-Saxon Language and Literature. [Formerly ENGL
219] The study of the Old English language. Selected historical and literary prose. Short heroic poems. Serves as repeat credit for students who
completed 296a before fall 2012. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3314. Chaucer. [Formerly ENGL 220] Study of The Canterbury
Tales and Chaucer’s world. [3] (HCA)

A&S

166
ENGL 3316. Medieval Literature. [Formerly ENGL 221] The drama, lyrics, romance, allegory, and satire of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, studied in the context of the period’s intellectual climate and social
change. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3318. The History of the English Language. [Formerly ENGL
240] The development of English syntax. History of the English vocabulary:
word formation, borrowing, semantic change, and meter. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3330. Sixteenth Century. [Formerly ENGL 248] Prose and poetry
of the sixteenth century. Emphasis on Spenser and his contemporaries.
[3] (HCA)
ENGL 3332. English Renaissance: The Drama. [Formerly ENGL 250]
English drama, exclusive of Shakespeare, from 1550-1642: Marlowe, Jonson, Webster, and others. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3335. English Renaissance Poetry. Development of the English poetic tradition from 1500-1700. Repeat credit for students who have
earned credit for 3335W. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3335W. English Renaissance Poetry. Development of the English poetic tradition from 1500-1700. Repeat credit for students who have
earned credit for 3335. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3336. Shakespeare. [Formerly ENGL 209A] About twenty of the
major plays considered in chronological order over two terms, with emphasis on Shakespeare’s development as a dramatic artist. Primarily comedies and histories. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3337. Shakespeare. [Formerly ENGL 209B] About twenty of the
major plays considered in chronological order over two terms, with emphasis on Shakespeare’s development as a dramatic artist. Primarily tragedies and romances. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3340. Shakespeare: Representative Selections. [Formerly
ENGL 210] A representative selection of plays, including histories, tragedies, comedies, and romances, designed to give the student a sense of
the full range of Shakespeare’s work in one semester. Repeat credit for
students who have completed 3340W. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3340W. Shakespeare: Representative Selections. [Formerly
ENGL 210W] A representative selection of plays, including histories, tragedies, comedies, and romances, designed to give the student a sense of
the full range of Shakespeare’s work in one semester. Repeat credit for
students who have completed 3340. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3346. Seventeenth-Century Literature. [Formerly ENGL 249]
Poetry and prose from 1600 to the English Civil War, such as Metaphysical
and Cavalier poetry, essays, romances, and satires. Authors may include
Bacon, Cavendish, Donne, Herbert, Jonson, Lanier, Marvell, and Wroth.
[3] (HCA)
ENGL 3348. Milton. [Formerly ENGL 251] The early English poems; Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained, and Samson Agonistes; the major prose.
[3] (HCA)
ENGL 3360. Restoration and the Eighteenth Century. [Formerly
ENGL 252A] Explorations of the aesthetic and social world of letters from
the English Civil War to the French Revolution. Drama, poetry, and prose,
including Restoration plays, political poetry, satire, travel narratives, and
tales. Authors may include Behn, Dryden, Congreve, Addison, Swift,
Finch, Pope, Fielding, Burney, Johnson, and Inchbald. Earlier writers. [3]
(HCA)
ENGL 3361. Restoration and the Eighteenth Century. [Formerly
ENGL 252B] Explorations of the aesthetic and social world of letters from
the English Civil War to the French Revolution. Drama, poetry, and prose,
including Restoration plays, political poetry, satire, travel narratives, and
tales. Authors may include Behn, Dryden, Congreve, Addison, Swift,
Finch, Pope, Fielding, Burney, Johnson, and Inchbald. Later writers. [3]
(HCA)
ENGL 3364. The Eighteenth-Century English Novel. [Formerly ENGL
230] The English novel from its beginning through Jane Austen. Development of the novel as a literary form, and study of selected works of Defoe,
Richardson, Fielding, Sterne, and other novelists of the period. [3] (HCA)

vanderbilt university
ENGL 3370. The Bible in Literature. [Formerly ENGL 282] An examination of ways in which the Bible and biblical imagery have functioned in
literature and fine arts, in both “high culture” and popular culture, from Old
English poems to modern poetry, drama, fiction, cartoons, and political
rhetoric. Readings include influential biblical texts and a broad selection
of literary texts drawn from all genres and periods of English literature. [3]
(HCA)
ENGL 3610. The Romantic Period. [Formerly ENGL 254A] Prose and
poetry of the Wordsworths, the Shelleys, Byron, Keats, and others. [3]
(HCA)
ENGL 3611. The Romantic Period. [Formerly ENGL 254B] Continuation of 3610. Prose and poetry of the Wordsworths, the Shelleys, Byron,
Keats, and others. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3614. The Victorian Period. [Formerly ENGL 255] Works of Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Hardy, and others. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3618. The Nineteenth-Century English Novel. [Formerly ENGL
231] The study of selected novels of Dickens, Thackeray, Emily Brontë,
George Eliot, George Meredith, Thomas Hardy, and other major novelists
of the period. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3620. Nineteenth-Century American Literature. [Formerly
ENGL 266] Explorations of themes, forms, and social and cultural issues
shaping the works of American writers. Authors may include Cooper, Poe,
Hawthorne, Douglass, Jacobs, Stowe, Melville, Dickinson, Alcott, Whitman, and Twain. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3622. Nineteenth-Century American Women Writers. [Formerly ENGL 260] Themes and forms of American women’s prose and poetry,
with the emphasis on alternative visions of the frontier, progress, class,
race, and self-definition. Authors include Child, Kirkland, Fern, Jacobs,
Harper, Dickinson, and Chopin. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3624W. Literature of the American Civil War. [Formerly ENGL
213W] Origins and impact of the war as depicted in short stories, novels, poems, and films. Harriet Beecher Stowe, Stephen Crane, Margaret
Mitchell, William Faulkner, and Margaret Walker. [3] (US)
ENGL 3630. The Modern British Novel. [Formerly ENGL 233] The British novel from the beginning of the twentieth century to the present. Conrad, Joyce, Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Forster, and other novelists varying
at the discretion of instructor. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3634. Modern Irish Literature. [Formerly ENGL 264] Major works
from the Irish literary revival to the present, with special attention to the
works of Yeats, Synge, Joyce, O’Casey, and Beckett. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3640. Modern British and American Poetry: Yeats to Auden.
[Formerly ENGL 256] A course in the interpretation and criticism of selected modern masters of poetry, British and American, with the emphasis
on poetry as an art. Poets selected may vary at discretion of instructor.
[3] (HCA)
ENGL 3642. Film and Modernism. [Formerly ENGL 265] Film in the context of the major themes of literary modernism: the divided self, language
and realism, nihilism and belief, and spatialization of time. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3644. Twentieth-Century American Novel. [Formerly ENGL
232A] Explorations of themes, forms, and social cultural issues shaping
the works of American novelists. Authors may include Fitzgerald, Faulkner,
Hemingway, Hurston, Ellison, McCarthy, Bellow, Kingston, Morrison, Pynchon. Emphasizes writers before 1945. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3645. Twentieth-Century American Novel. [Formerly ENGL
232B] Explorations of themes, forms, and social cultural issues shaping
the works of American novelists. Authors may include Fitzgerald, Faulkner,
Hemingway, Hurston, Ellison, McCarthy, Bellow, Kingston, Morrison, Pynchon. Emphasizes writers after 1945. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3646. Poetry Since World War II. [Formerly ENGL 258] Poets
studied vary at discretion of instructor. Offered on a graded basis only.
[3] (HCA)
ENGL 3650. Ethnic American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 279] Texts
and theory relevant to understanding race, culture, and ethnicity in the

College of Arts and Science / Courses
formation of American culture. Literature from at least three of the following
groups: African Americans, Native Americans, Asian Americans, Chicano/
Latino Americans, Caribbean Americans, and European Americans. [3] (P)
ENGL 3650W. Ethnic American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 279W]
Texts and theory relevant to understanding race, culture, and ethnicity
in the formation of American culture. Literature from at least three of the
following groups: African Americans, Native Americans, Asian Americans,
Chicano/Latino Americans, Caribbean Americans, and European Americans. [3] (P)
ENGL 3654. African American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 263] Examination of the literature produced by African Americans. May include literary
movements, vernacular traditions, social discourses, material culture, and
critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3654W.
[3] (US)
ENGL 3654W. African American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 263W]
Examination of the literature produced by African Americans. May include
literary movements, vernacular traditions, social discourses, material culture, and critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed
3654. [3] (US)
ENGL 3658. Latino-American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 275] Texts
and theory relevant to understanding constructs of Latino identity, including race, class, gender, and basis for immigration, in the context of
American culture. The course focuses on the examination of literature by
Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, and Latin American writers in
the United States. [3] (P)
ENGL 3662. Asian American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 277] Diversity
of Asian American literary production with specific attention to works after
1965. Topics such as gender and sexuality, memory and desire, and diaspora and panethnicity in the context of aesthetics and politics of Asian
American experience. [3] (P)
ENGL 3662W. Asian American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 277W]
Diversity of Asian American literary production with specific attention to
works after 1965. Topics such as gender and sexuality, memory and desire, and diaspora and panethnicity in the context of aesthetics and politics
of Asian American experience. [3] (P)
ENGL 3664. Jewish American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 283] Nineteenth century to the present. Issues of race, gender, ethnicity, immigration, and diaspora. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3670. Colonial and Post-Colonial Literature. [Formerly ENGL
278] Literature exploring European colonialism and its aftermath from the
eighteenth century to the present: language, gender, and agency in the
colonial encounter; anti-colonial resistance movements; and postcolonial
cultures. Topics may vary; course may be taken more than once with permission of the Director of Undergraduate Studies. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3670W. Colonial and Post-Colonial Literature. [Formerly ENGL
278W] Literature exploring European colonialism and its aftermath from
the eighteenth century to the present: language, gender, and agency in
the colonial encounter; anti-colonial resistance movements; and postcolonial cultures. Topics may vary; course may be taken more than once with
permission of the Director of Undergraduate Studies. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3674. Caribbean Literature. [Formerly ENGL 271] Caribbean literature from 1902 to the present. Emphasis on writing since 1952, which
marks the beginning of West Indian nationalism and the rise of the West
Indian novel. [3] (INT)
ENGL 3678. Anglophone African Literature. [Formerly ENGL 276]
From the Sundiata Epic to the present with emphasis on the novel. Attention to issues of identity, post coloniality, nationalism, race, and ethnicity
in both SubSaharan and Mahgrib literatures. Such authors as Achebe,
Ngugi, Gordimer, Awoonor, and El Saadaw. [3] (INT)
ENGL 3680. Twentieth-Century Drama. [Formerly ENGL 286A] Topics
in twentieth century drama drawn from the American, British, and/or world
traditions. Formal structures of dramatic literature studied within contexts
of performance, theatrical production, and specific dramatic careers. Authors may include O’Neill, Albee, Hansberry, Hellman, Stoppard, Wilson,
and Churchill. Emphasizes American drama. [3] (US)

167
ENGL 3681. Twentieth-Century Drama. [Formerly ENGL 286B] Topics
in twentieth century drama drawn from the American, British, and/or world
traditions. Formal structures of dramatic literature studied within contexts
of performance, theatrical production, and specific dramatic careers. Authors may include O’Neill, Albee, Hansberry, Hellman, Stoppard, Wilson,
and Churchill. Emphasizes British and world drama. [3] (US)
ENGL 3683. Contemporary British Literature. [Formerly ENGL 235]
The novel, short story, and verse in Great Britain since World War II. [3]
(HCA)
ENGL 3692. Desire in America: Literature, Cinema, and History.
[Formerly ENGL 267] The influence of desire and repression in shaping
American culture and character from the mid-nineteenth century to the
present. [3] (US)
ENGL 3694. America on Film: Art and Ideology. [Formerly ENGL
268A] American culture and character through film, film theory, and literature. [3] (US)
ENGL 3695. America on Film: Performance and Culture. [Formerly
ENGL 268B] Film performance in the construction of identity and gender,
social meaning and narrative, public image and influence in America. [3]
(US)
ENGL 3710. Literature and Intellectual History. [Formerly ENGL 214A]
Fiction, poetry, and prose writings that represent overarching themes in
English and/or American literature across conventional historical periods in
order to define and trace their genealogy and evolution. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3711. Literature and Intellectual History. [Formerly ENGL 214B]
The emergence of modern consciousness in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3720. Literature, Science, and Technology. [Formerly ENGL
243] The relationship of science and technology to literature, film, and
popular media. Focus on such topics as digital technology, genetics, and
the representation of science in particular periods, genres, movements,
and critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed
3720W. [3] (P)
ENGL 3720W. Literature, Science, and Technology. [Formerly 243W]
The relationship of science and technology to literature, film, and popular
media. Focus on such topics as digital technology, genetics, and the representation of science in particular periods, genres, movements, and critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3720. [3] (P)
ENGL 3726. New Media. [Formerly ENGL 259] History, theory, and design of digital media. Literature, video, film, online games, and other interactive narratives. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3728. Science Fiction. [Formerly ENGL 242] Social and historical
developments within the genre. Works from the late nineteenth century to
the present. Cultural issues, including race, gender, sexuality, violence,
and the representation of science. Repeat credit for students who have
completed 3728W. [3] (P)
ENGL 3728W. Science Fiction. [Formerly ENGL 242W] Social and historical developments within the genre. Works from the late nineteenth
century to the present. Cultural issues, including race, gender, sexuality,
violence, and the representation of science. Repeat credit for students
who have completed 3728. [3] (P)
ENGL 3730. Literature and the Environment. [Formerly ENGL 245]
Environmental issues from British, American, and global perspectives.
Methodological approaches such as ecocriticism, environmental and social justice, ethics, and activism. The role of literature and the imagination
in responding to ecological problems and shaping environmental values.
[3] (HCA)
ENGL 3734. Literature and Law. [Formerly ENGL 262] Study of the relationship between the discourses of law and literature. Focus on such
topics as legal narratives, metaphor in the courts, representations of justice on the social stage. Repeat credit for students who have completed
3734W. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3734W. Literature and Law. [Formerly ENGL 262W] Study of the
relationship between the discourses of law and literature. Focus on such

A&S

168
topics as legal narratives, metaphor in the courts, representations of justice on the social stage. Repeat credit for students who have completed
3734. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3736. Words and Music. [Formerly ENGL 218] An investigation
of works of literature that have inspired musical settings and the musical
settings themselves. Emphasis on literary and musical analysis and interpretation. No musical background assumed. Repeat credit for students
who have completed MUSL 2330. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3740. Critical Theory. [Formerly ENGL 244] Major theoretical approaches that have shaped critical discourse, the practices of reading,
and the relation of literature and culture. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3742. Feminist Theory. [Formerly ENGL 246] An introduction to
feminist theory. Topics include cross-cultural gender identities; the development of “masculinity” and “femininity”; racial, ethnic, class, and national
differences; sexual orientations; the function of ideology; strategies of resistance; visual and textual representations; the nature of power. [3] (P)
ENGL 3744. Advanced Poetry. [Formerly ENGL 247] Formal analysis
and close reading of major poems in the extended canon of British and
American poetry. Related examples of historical, theoretical, and applied
criticism. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3746. Workshop in English and History. [Formerly ENGL 280]
(Also listed as History 3746) Team-taught by a historian and an interdisciplinary scholar. Explores intersection of disciplines through close examination of texts in historical context. Preference to students majoring in the
English-History program. May be repeated for credit more than once if
there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 3748. Introduction to English Linguistics. [Formerly ENGL 241]
Systematic study of present-day English sounds, words, sentences, and
the contexts of language production. Contemporary varieties of English. [3]
(HCA)
ENGL 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly ENGL 289A] Designed primarily for majors. Projects are arranged with individual professors and must
be confirmed with the director of undergraduate studies within two weeks
of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the
3851 rolls. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3
credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all
semesters of ENGL 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 3852. Independent Study. [Formerly ENGL 289B] Designed primarily for majors. Projects are arranged with individual professors and must
be confirmed with the director of undergraduate studies within two weeks
of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the
3852 rolls. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3
credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all
semesters of ENGL 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 3890. Movements in Literature. [Formerly ENGL 272] Studies in
intellectual currents that create a group or school of writers within a historical
period. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3890W. Movements in Literature. [Formerly ENGL 272W] Studies in intellectual currents that create a group or school of writers within a
historical period. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no
duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course each semester. [3] (HCA)

vanderbilt university
ENGL 3892W. Problems in Literature. [Formerly ENGL 273W] Studies
in common themes, issues, or motifs across several historical periods.
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in
topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3894. Major Figures in Literature. [Formerly ENGL 274] Studies
in the works of one or two writers with attention to the development of
a writer’s individual canon, the biographical dimension of this work, and
critical responses to it. May be repeated for credit more than once if there
is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of
this course each semester. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3894W. Major Figures in Literature. [Formerly ENGL 274W]
Studies in the works of one or two writers with attention to the development of a writer’s individual canon, the biographical dimension of this
work, and critical responses to it. May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3896. Special Topics in Investigative Writing in America. [Formerly ENGL 287] Course will be taught by a distinguished visiting journalist
from a major U.S. newspaper or magazine. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total
for all semesters of ENGL 287] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 3898. Special Topics in English and American Literature. [Formerly ENGL 288] Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once
if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one
section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3898W. Special Topics in English and American Literature.
[Formerly ENGL 288W] Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)
ENGL 3899. Special Topics in Film. [Formerly ENGL 269] Theory and
practice of cinema as an aesthetic and cultural form. May be repeated for
credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of ENGL 3899] (HCA)
ENGL 4960. Senior Year Capstone. [Formerly ENGL 299] Topic chosen
by the instructor. Prerequisite: 2200. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 4998. Honors Colloquium. [Formerly ENGL 290A] Background
for writing the honors thesis. Emphasis on research methods, critical approaches, and the students’ own projects. Limited to seniors admitted to
the English Honors Program. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ENGL 4999. Honors Thesis. [Formerly ENGL 290B] Prerequisite: 4998.
[3] (No AXLE credit)

Environmental and Sustainability Studies
ENVS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ENVS 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ENVS 4101. Seminar. [Formerly ENVS 278] The relationship between society and the environment. Sustainability, adaptation, climate science, and
policy. Open only to junior and senior ENVS minors. [3] (SBS)
ENVS 4961. Special Topics. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit
more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL 3891. Special Topics in Creative Writing. [Formerly ENGL 291]
Advanced instruction in creative writing in emerging modes and hybrid
genres. [3] (HCA)

European Studies

ENGL 3892. Problems in Literature. [Formerly ENGL 273] Studies in
common themes, issues, or motifs across several historical periods. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.
Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[3] (HCA)

EUS 2201. European Society and Culture. [Formerly EUS 201] An interdisciplinary survey of European society, culture, and politics since 1900.
[3] (INT)

EUS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly EUS 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses

169

EUS 2203. The Idea of Europe. [Formerly EUS 203] European identity from ancient ideals to its reality as the European Union. Emphasis on
Europe as cultural construct and definable space. Historical, political, religious, philosophical, and cultural movements for Europe’s claim to legitimacy. [3] (INT)

FNEC 2705. Advanced Corporate Finance. Strategic financial decisions. Corporate financial theory, cost of capital and capital budgeting,
discounted cash flow valuation, and financial multiples. Payout policy, equity and debt financing, option pricing theory, and applications. Prerequisite: BUS 2300. [3] (SBS)

EUS 2208. Conspiracy Theories and Rumors in European and U.S.
History. [Formerly EUS 208] From 1600 to the present. Jesuits, Jews,
and the Illuminati. The American and French Revolutions, McCarthyism,
UFOs, and New World Order theories. No credit for students who completed EUS 3890 section 1 in spring 2011. [3] (INT)

FNEC 3700. Investment Analysis. [Formerly FNEC 261] Investment
principles and practices. Security analysis and valuation. Portfolio theory.
Current issues in the financial sector. Stock market simulation. Prerequisite: 2700 or 2705. [3] (SBS)

EUS 2220. Religion and Politics in Modern Europe, 1648-Present.
[Formerly EUS 220] Toleration in the Enlightenment; the French Revolution; antisemitism; genocide; secularism and political Islam. [3] (INT)

FNEC 3705. Financial Management. [Formerly FNEC 275] Analysis of
cases representing capital budgeting, forecasting cash flow, risk assessment, capital structure, and mergers and acquisitions. Seminar. Prerequisite: 2700 or 2705. [3] (SBS)

EUS 2240. Topics in European Studies. [Formerly EUS 240] Topics of
special interest on modern European culture or society. May be repeated
for credit when topics vary. [3] (No AXLE credit)

FNEC 3710. Corporate Valuation. Intrinsic, relative, and contingent valuation methodologies. Theoretical and market basis for investment. Valuation project. Prerequisite: 2700 or 2705. [3] (SBS)

EUS 2260. European Cities. [Formerly EUS 260] The history, politics,
society, or culture of important European cities. Content varies according
to location and disciplinary focus. The course is taught during the May
Session in Europe with the cities themselves complementing daily lectures
and site visits. Course requirements include preliminary work on campus,
a research paper, and one or more examinations. May be repeated for
credit in different cities. [3] (INT)

FNEC 3851. Independent Study in Financial Economics. [Formerly
FNEC 291A] A program of independent readings in financial economics
arranged in consultation with an adviser. Prerequisite: written permission
of an instructor and the program director. No credit for graduate students.
May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if
there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of FNEC 291a and 291b] (No AXLE credit)

EUS 2800. Pursuing Utopia: Social Justice & Romanticism in the
Alps. Social justice and literary experiments of writers who sought alternative approaches to art and society in the ‘neutral’ Alpine settings of Europe. [3] (INT)
EUS 3850. Independent Readings and/or Research. [Formerly EUS
289A] Independent readings and/or research on approved topics relating to modern European society and culture. [Variable credit: 1-3 each
semester, maximum of 6 hours in 3850 and 3851 combined] (No AXLE
credit)
EUS 3851. Independent Readings and/or Research. [Formerly EUS
289B] Independent readings and/or research on approved topics relating to modern European society and culture. [Variable credit: 1-3 each
semester, maximum of 6 hours in 3850 and 3851 combined] (No AXLE
credit)
EUS 4960. Senior Tutorial. [Formerly EUS 250] Supervised readings,
joint discussions, and independent research on a modern European topic
to be selected in consultation with the director of European Studies. Open
only to juniors and seniors. [3] (No AXLE credit)
EUS 4998. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly EUS 299A] Open only
to seniors who have been admitted to the European Studies departmental
honors program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Financial Economics
FNEC 1600. Financial Accounting. [Formerly FNEC 140] Financial reporting and its relevance to the managerial environment. Financial statements from the perspectives of the preparer and the user. [3] (No AXLE
credit)
FNEC 1605. Advanced Financial Accounting. Selected topics in accounting and financial reporting. Cash flow statements, income taxes,
long-term debt, and leases. Investments, derivative securities, contingencies, stockholders’ equity, and purchase accounting. Prerequisite: BUS
2100. [3] (SBS)
FNEC 2600. Managerial Accounting. [Formerly FNEC 220] Selected
topics in managerial accounting. Prerequisite: 1600 or 1605. [3] (SBS)
FNEC 2700. Corporate Finance. [Formerly FNEC 240] Investment and
financial decisions faced by firms. Theoretical basis of corporate decisionmaking. Various accounting documents and the alternative objectives of
firms, their management, and their owners. Attributes of firms that affect
market value. How investment decisions and methods used by firms to
finance these investments affect firm value. Prerequisite: 1600 and either
ECON 1500, 1510, MATH 2820, PSY 2100, or PSY-PC 2101. [3] (SBS)

FNEC 3852. Independent Study in Financial Economics. [Formerly
FNEC 291B] A program of independent readings in financial economics
arranged in consultation with an adviser. Prerequisite: written permission
of an instructor and the program director. No credit for graduate students.
May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if
there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of FNEC 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

French
FREN 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly FREN 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
FREN 1101. Introduction to French in the World. [Formerly FREN
101A] Reading, writing, speaking, and listening through an exploration
of the French-speaking world. For students who have studied little or no
French. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced French language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)
FREN 1102. Introduction to French in the World. [Formerly FREN
101B] Continuation of 1101. Study of the language through an exploration
of the French-speaking world. No credit for students who have earned
credit for a more advanced French language course. [3] (INT)
FREN 1103. Accelerated Introduction to French in the World. [Formerly FREN 102] Intensive course for students who have studied one to
three years of French. No credit for students who have earned credit for
1101, 1102, or a more advanced French language course. [3] (INT)
FREN 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly FREN 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
FREN 2203. Intermediate French Language and Cultures. French
and Francophone cultures through readings, film, and discussion. Designed for students who have completed elementary-level French. No
credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced French
language course. Prerequisite: 1102 or 1103. [3] (INT)
FREN 2501W. French Composition and Grammar. [Formerly FREN
201W] Prerequisite: 2203 or the equivalent. No graduate credit. No credit

A&S

170

vanderbilt university

for students who have earned credit for a more advanced French language course. [3] (INT)

works from Africa, Canada, the Caribbean, countries bordering the Indian
Ocean, and Vietnam. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)

FREN 2550W. French Writing Workshop. Intensive work with emphasis
on development of sophisticated use of grammatical constructs. Offered
only at Vanderbilt-in-France. [3] (INT)

FREN 3233. Francophone Caribbean Literature. [Formerly FREN 242]
Major literary works of Haiti, Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French Guyana.
Historical, geographic, and cultural context. Comparative approaches to
the Hispanic and Anglophone Caribbean. Repeat credit for students who
completed 294 section 1 in spring 2012. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN 2611. Phonetics. [Formerly FREN 203] Methodical comparison
of French and English sounds. Correct formation of French sounds; oral
exercises and aural training. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)
FREN 2614. Advanced Conversational French. [Formerly FREN 214]
Emphasis on idiomatic usage and strategies for oral communication. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)
FREN 2891. Cross Cultural Communication. Tools to build intercultural competencies in multicultural France. Integration with local culture and
multicultural sensitivity. Offered only at Vanderbilt in France. Knowledge of
French is not required. [3] (INT)
FREN 3101. Texts and Contexts: Middle Ages to the Enlightenment.
[Formerly FREN 211] Literature and culture in historical contexts. Offered
on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3102. Texts and Contexts: Revolution to the Present. [Formerly FREN 212] Literature and culture in historical contexts. Offered on a
graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3111. French for Business. [Formerly FREN 204] Specialized vocabulary of business terms, business letters, and exercises in comprehension and translation. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)
FREN 3112. Medical French in Intercultural Contexts. [Formerly
FREN 205] Advanced conversation course dealing with medical issues in
the Francophone world. Prerequisites: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3113. Advanced French Grammar. [Formerly FREN 226] A systematic review with particular attention to morphology and syntax. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)
FREN 3180. La Provence. [Formerly FREN 215] Geography, history,
politics, architecture, and other cultural elements of Provence. Offered at
Vanderbilt in France. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)
FREN 3181. Contemporary France. [Formerly FREN 209] The culture of
France today; social, economic, and political issues; literature and the arts.
Offered at Vanderbilt in France. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)
FREN 3188. The Contemporary Press and Media. [Formerly FREN
218] Analysis of newspapers and magazines through the comparative
study of national and international issues in the press of the French-speaking world. Includes television broadcasts. Prerequisite: 2501W. Offered at
Vanderbilt in France. [3] (P)

FREN 3234. Contemporary Francophone Press. [Formerly FREN 219]
Critical study of the Francophone press (print, television, radio, internet)
in Europe, Africa, Canada, Louisiana, Islands in the Caribbean and Indian
Ocean (Madagascar, Seychelles). Current issues in the media. Comparisons with the U.S. press. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3281. Provence and the French Novel. [Formerly FREN 251]
Images of Provence, its people, and their customs in novels of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries by Dumas, Zola, Giono, Pagnol. Offered at
Vanderbilt in France. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3286. Cultural Study Tour. [Formerly FREN 216] Preparation for
excursions; discussions, readings, and presentations. Offered each summer in the Vanderbilt in France program. [1] (No AXLE credit)
FREN 3620. Age of Louis XIV. [Formerly FREN 261] Literature and society in the reign of Louis XIV. Authors include Mme de Lafayette, La Fontaine, Molière, Pascal, Racine, and Mme de Sévigné. Prerequisite: 2501W.
[3] (HCA)
FREN 3621. Enlightenment and Revolution. [Formerly FREN 260]
Major writers of the eighteenth century, including Montesquieu, Voltaire,
Rousseau, Diderot; literature of the Revolution. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3622. From Romanticism to Symbolism. [Formerly FREN 265]
Nineteenth-century literature through its major movements: Romanticism,
Realism, Naturalism, and Symbolism. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3623. The Twentieth-Century Novel. [Formerly FREN 238] The
novel as a genre in the context of modernity and post modernity. Readings
will focus on narrative techniques. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3730. The Beat Generation’s French Connection. [Formerly
FREN 266] The Beats’ ties to Paris and to Quebec through French-Canadian Jack Kerouac. Antonin Artaud, Jean Genet, Arthur Rimbaud, and
Marquis de Sade. No credit for students who earned credit for ENGL 288
section 3 in fall 2008 or ENGL 272 section 4 in spring 2010. Prerequisite:
2501W. [3] (INT)
FREN 3788. Understanding the Maghreb. [Formerly FREN 268] The
North African Maghreb, its history and society. Novels, essays, documentaries, newspaper articles, and films. Offered at Vanderbilt in France. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN 3222. The Early Modern Novel. [Formerly FREN 237] Development of the novel as a genre in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries;
its changing social, intellectual, and political context. Prerequisite: 2501W.
[3] (HCA)

FREN 3789. Francophone Literature and Film of the Maghreb. [Formerly FREN 269] Literature, film, and their cultural context in Francophone
North Africa. Offered at Vanderbilt in France. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3]
(SBS)

FREN 3223. The Querelles des femmes. [Formerly FREN 232] Debates
around the status of medieval and Renaissance women, including the Roman de la rose. Alain Chartier, Christine de Pisan, the Des Roches, Montaigne, and Marie de Gourney. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)

FREN 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly FREN 289] Content varies
according to the needs of the individual student. Primarily designed to
cover pertinent material not otherwise available in the regular curriculum.
May be repeated for a total of 12 credits over a four-semester period, but
students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3;
maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of FREN 3850] (No AXLE
credit)

FREN 3224. Medieval French Literature. [Formerly FREN 234] Thematic exploration of chronicles, romance, poetry, and theatre of medieval
France and the history and culture that surrounded these literary productions. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 3230. French and Francophone Cinema. [Formerly FREN 210]
The themes and art of film in France and the French-speaking world. Offered in French at Vanderbilt in France and in English at Nashville. When
offered in English, this course does not count toward the minor, and writing must be done in French to count toward the major. [3] (INT)
FREN 3232. Introduction to Francophone Literature. [Formerly FREN
222] The geopolitical, linguistic, and literary dimensions of the notion “La
Francophonie.” Readings will be chosen from fictional and nonfictional

FREN 3880. Internship Training in France. [Formerly FREN 287B] Under faculty supervision, students intern in public or private organizations,
and complete research and readings. Offered on a pass/fail basis only and
must be taken concurrently with 3881. Corequisite: 3881. [1] (No AXLE
credit)
FREN 3881. Internship Readings and Research in France. [Formerly
FREN 287A] Under faculty supervision, students intern in public or private
organizations, and complete research and readings. Must be taken concurrently with 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
FREN 3891. Special Topics in Traditions. [Formerly FREN 294] Topics
vary. Prerequisite: 2501W. May be repeated for credit more than once if
there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
FREN 3892. Special Topics in Communications and Intersections.
[Formerly FREN 295] Topics vary. Prerequisite: 2501W. May be repeated
for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may
enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE
credit)
FREN 4023. The African Novel. [Formerly FREN 239] The postcolonial
Francophone novel of Subsaharan Africa illustrating topics such as tradition and modernity, the identity of Africa, the representation of women,
and the ideology of language. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)
FREN 4025. From Carnival to the “Carnivalesque”. [Formerly FREN
240] Carnival themes of transgression, the grotesque, feasting, and the
“fool.” Rabelais to contemporary works. Offered on a graded basis only.
Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)
FREN 4027. Emile Zola: From Naturalist Novels to Social Activism.
[Formerly FREN 241] The author’s method of researching subject matter
and style of writing. “Environmental” influences of violence, prostitution,
and alcoholism. The idea of the “public intellectual.” Prerequisite: 2501W.
[3] (HCA)
FREN 4029. Twentieth-Century French Literature. [Formerly FREN
267] Critical readings of representative works organized thematically with
emphasis on their contextual and intertextual relationships. Prerequisite:
2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 4030. French and Italian Avant-garde. [Formerly FREN 271] Italian authors writing in French in the international and experimental atmosphere of Paris before World War I. D’Annunzio’s “Le martyre de Saint
Sébastien” to Marinetti’s “Manifeste du Futurisme.” Offered on a graded
basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 4221. Literature of the Fantastic. [Formerly FREN 253] The
theme of the fantastic in nineteenth- and twentieth-century prose fiction.
Critical analysis using psychological and psychoanalytic concepts. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
FREN 4232. Literature and Law. [Formerly FREN 252] Confessions,
murder, argumentation, interpretation, and the representation of “the
criminal” in literary and legal texts from traditional French writings. Offered
on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)
FREN 4284. Art and Literature of the Nineteenth Century. [Formerly
FREN 224] Romanticism, realism, and symbolism in French art and literature. Prerequisite: 2501W. Offered at Vanderbilt in France. [3] (HCA)
FREN 4285. Art and Literature of the Twentieth Century. [Formerly
FREN 225] Literary and artistic movements of the twentieth century in
France. Prerequisite: 2501W. Offered at Vanderbilt in France. [3] (HCA)
FREN 4320. French Feminist Thought: Literary and Critical. [Formerly FREN 255] Feminist themes in twentieth-century French literature
and criticism. Authors include Beauvoir, Duras, Sarraute, Irigaray, Cixous.
Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)
FREN 4322. Adultery and Transgressions in Literature. [Formerly
FREN 272] Comparative and historical study of texts from the Middle Ages
through the twentieth century. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)
FREN 4430. Jews & Arab-Muslims in France. [Formerly FREN 258]
Conflict between Jews and Arab-Muslims in France through analyses of
historical accounts, news reports, and literary and cultural manifestations.
From the origins of Zionism (~1885), to the Holocaust, and to the Intifadas
of 1987 and 2000 and the Charlie Hebdo and kosher supermarket massacres of 2015 in Paris. Prerequisite 2501W. [3] (P)
FREN 4432. French Intellectual History. [Formerly FREN 256] From
Montaigne to Sartre and beyond. Critical discourses and major philosophical texts. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

171
FREN 4998. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly FREN 299A] [3] (No AXLE
credit)
FREN 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly FREN 299B] [3] (No AXLE
credit)

German
GER 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly GER 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
GER 1101. Elementary German I. [Formerly GER 101] Development
of the four language skills of reading, listening, speaking, and writing. No
credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced German
language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)
GER 1102. Elementary German II. [Formerly GER 102] Continuation of
1101. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced
German language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)
GER 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly GER 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
GER 1482. Borders and Crossings: German Literature and Culture
from Romanticism to the Present. [Formerly GER 172] Textual and
visual contributions to German culture from the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries in English translation. Borders – physical, ideological, intellectual,
and metaphorical – and crossing these borders, as passages to more
creative or liberated states of being, or as acts of transgress. Taught in
English. [3] (HCA)
GER 2066. Non-Equivalent Credit (German Content Program II).
[Formerly GER 72DT] This course has no Vanderbilt equivalent. Credit is
eligible to count toward the major or minor in GER as a German Content
Program II course.
GER 2201. Intermediate German I. [Formerly GER 103] Intensive review
of German grammar as a basis for reading, conversation, and composition. Texts and discussions address issues in contemporary German society. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced
German language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)
GER 2202. Intermediate German II. [Formerly GER 104] Practice in
reading, listening, speaking, and writing. Short stories, one longer work
(Kafka), and discussions examine aspects of modern life from a German
perspective. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced German language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (INT)
GER 2217. Advanced Grammar. [Formerly GER 220] Study of word
formation and sentence structure in modern German, supplemented by
contemporary readings, with discussion. Not open to students who have
participated in the Regensburg exchange program. [3] (INT)
GER 2281. Intensive German in Regensburg. [Formerly GER 105]
Grammatical and syntactic structures. Prerequisite: 2201; corequisite:
2282. [3] (No AXLE credit)
GER 2282. Intensive German in Regensburg. [Formerly GER 106]
Landeskunde and communicative skills. Prerequisite: 2201; corequisite:
2281. [3] (No AXLE credit)
GER 2310W. Introduction to German Studies. [Formerly GER 201W]
Literature, history, philosophy, and science of German-speaking countries
presented through contemporary and multidisciplinary critical concepts
and practices. Technology, theorizing mass culture, forms of cultural production, tradition and modernity. Reading and discussions in German.
Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
GER 2320. Conversation and Composition: Current Events. [Formerly GER 213] Advanced German language course focusing on oral and
writing proficiency. Topics on current events and societal developments.
Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

A&S

172
GER 2321. Conversation and Composition: Contemporary Culture.
[Formerly GER 214] Advanced German language course focusing on oral
and writing proficiency. Topics on contemporary media and culture. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
GER 2341. German Culture and Literature. [Formerly GER 221] Introduction to major periods and genres of German cultural production from
the middle ages to the present; overview of major social and political developments. Literary, philosophical, and other texts. Readings and discussions in German. [3] (INT)
GER 2342. German Culture and Literature. [Formerly GER 222] Continuation of 2341. Introduction to major periods and genres of German
cultural production from the middle ages to the present; overview of major
social and political developments. Literary, philosophical, and other texts.
Readings and discussions in German. [3] (INT)
GER 2441. Great German Works in English. [Formerly GER 183] German literature and culture from 1750 to present. The relationship of culture
and history, changing notions of individual and community, modern sensibilities expressed in various genres. Goethe, Nietzsche, Freud, Kafka, and
Jelinek. Knowledge of German not required. [3] (INT)
GER 2442. War on Screen. [Formerly GER 182] Representations of
World War II and the fight against Nazi Germany in Hollywood and other
cinemas, contemporary video games, television, and installation art. How
current modes of warfare and the global war on terror have changed the
conventions of depicting war. [3] (HCA)
GER 2443. German Cinema: Vampires, Victims, and Vamps. [Formerly GER 270] An analysis of representative German film with special
emphasis on its sociocultural and historical context. Discussion will include
pertinent theories of cinematography and cinematic narration. Taught in
English. [3] (INT)
GER 2444. German Fairy Tales: From Brothers Grimm to Walt Disney. [Formerly GER 244] The German fairy tale tradition and its role in
American culture. Taught in English. [3] (INT)
GER 2445. Nazi Cinema: The Manipulation of Mass Culture. [Formerly GER 273] Nazi manipulation of mass culture through film (propaganda, musicals, westerns). Some comparison with American film of the
era, additional examination of “fascist” aesthetic legacy in American culture today. No knowledge of German required. [3] (P)
GER 2551. Topics: Pre-18th Century Culture and Literature (ENGL).
German-speaking cultures and their literatures from 8th to the early 18th
century. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (INT)
GER 2552. Topics: 18th and 19th Century Culture and Literature
(ENGL). Literature, philosophy, art, and politics, 1750-1914, of Germanspeaking cultures. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is
no duplication in topic. [3] (INT)
GER 2553. Topics: 20th and 21st Century Culture and Literature
(ENGL). Literature, history, aesthetics, and politics in German-speaking
cultures from Dada to the present. Taught in English. May be repeated for
credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (INT)
GER 2554. Topics in Visual Culture and Media (ENGL). Cinema, media arts, visual culture, and media history of German-speaking cultures
from pre-digital to the digital age. Taught in English. May be repeated for
credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)
GER 2555. Topics in German Studies (ENGL). Seminal aspects of
German literature, culture, and civilization through interdisciplinary focus.
Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in
topic. [3] (INT)
GER 2556. Topics in Intellectual History (ENGL). Major trends and
figures from the Enlightenment to the contemporary age. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)
GER 2557. Topics in Genre (ENGL). Main genres of German literature
and culture. Relationship between genres and the social, political, and cultural developments that lead to their formation and transformation. Taught

vanderbilt university
in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3]
(HCA)
GER 3201. Advanced German: Germany Today. German culture, politics, social issues. News media and current events. Development of advanced written and oral communication skills. Offered on a graded basis
only. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
GER 3202W. Advanced German: Reading, Writing, Analysis. Subtleties of style. Different vocabularies of textual and cultural criticism. Analysis
of wide range of text genres and cultural materials. Offered on graded
basis only. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
GER 3323. From Language to Literature. [Formerly GER 223] Continuing practice in reading, listening, speaking, and writing; emphasis on
literary terminology and techniques for critical reading of German. Recommended as preparation for more advanced literary study, prose, poetry,
and drama. Prerequisite: 2320. [3] (HCA)
GER 3343. The Aesthetics of Violence: Terror, Crime, and Dread
in German Literature. [Formerly GER 243] The “dark” side of imagination in twentieth-century German literature including history and theory of
modern art, emphasis on literary representation, mutual influences between aesthetic reflection and political action. No knowledge of German
required. [3] (P)
GER 3344. Women at the Margins: German-Jewish Women Writers. [Formerly GER 271] Examination of themes, forms, and sociocultural
issues shaping the work of German-Jewish women writers from the Enlightenment to the present. Readings and discussions in English. [3] (HCA)
GER 3345. Love and Friendship. [Formerly GER 245] Concepts of life
and friendship, Greek antiquity to Romanticism, modern and postmodern
times. Philosophical and literary texts, letters, and essays. Taught in English. [3] (No AXLE credit)
GER 3375. Art and Rebellion: Literary Experiment in the 1960s and
1970s. [Formerly GER 275] German literature under the conditions of protest and rebellion. Experiments in poetry, prose, and theatre; new directions in art and media theory; historical influences. Taught in English. [3]
(HCA)
GER 3378. Dreams in Literature. [Formerly GER 278] The difference
between sleeping and being awake. Literary and philosophical texts. Novels, short stories, diaries, poems, and drama written within the last two
hundred years. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
GER 3851. Independent Readings. [Formerly GER 289A] Designed for
majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under the
supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved
by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a foursemester period in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in
topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of GER 3851
and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
GER 3852. Independent Readings. [Formerly GER 289B] Designed for
majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under the
supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved
by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a foursemester period in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in
topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of GER 3851
and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
GER 3890. Selected Topics. [Formerly GER 294A] May be repeated for
a total of 12 credits in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of GER 3890
and 3891] (No AXLE credit)
GER 3891. Selected Topics. [Formerly GER 294B] May be repeated for
a total of 12 credits in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per
semester. [3; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of GER 3890
and 3891] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses

173

GER 4535. German Romanticism. [Formerly GER 235] The contributions of Schlegel, Tieck, Novalis, Eichendorff, and others to literature, philosophy, and theory. Intellectual, social, and political currents. [3] (INT)

GER 4566. Nineteenth-Century Prose. [Formerly GER 266] A study
of representative works of the main literary trends from Romanticism to
Naturalism. [3] (INT)

GER 4537. Women and Modernity. [Formerly GER 237] Women in German literature from the eighteenth century to the present, focusing on
questions of sexuality, political emancipation, artistic identity. No knowledge of German required. [3] (INT)

GER 4567. The German Novel from Kafka to Grass. [Formerly GER
267] A study and interpretation of the main literary trends and major figures
in twentieth-century narrative. [3] (INT)

GER 4548. German Lyric Poetry-Form and Function. [Formerly GER
248] Lyric forms as a reaction to personal trauma, collective desire, scientific and technological advances, and social change since the Thirty Years’
War. Love, loss, liberation. Students compose poems in imitation of classic examples of the folk song, ballad, sonnet. [3] (INT)
GER 4550. Studies in Genre. Main genres of German literature and
culture. Relationship between genre and the social, political, and cultural
developments that lead to a genre’s formation and transformation. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
GER 4551. Topics: Pre-18th Century Culture and Literature (GER).
German-speaking cultures and their literatures from 8th to the early 18th
century. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (INT)
GER 4552. Topics: 18th and 19th Century Culture and Literature
(GER). Literature, philosophy, art, and politics, 1750-1914, of Germanspeaking cultures. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in
topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (INT)
GER 4553. Topics: 20th and 21st Century Culture and Literature
(GER). Literature, history, aesthetics, and politics in German-speaking
cultures from Dada to the present. May be repeated for credit if there is no
duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (INT)
GER 4554. Topics in Visual Culture and Media (GER). Cinema, media
arts, visual culture, and media history of German-speaking cultures from
pre-digital to the digital age. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (HCA)
GER 4555. Topics in German Studies (GER). Seminal aspects of German literature, culture, and civilization through interdisciplinary focus. May
be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201
and 3202W. [3] (INT)
GER 4556. Topics in Intellectual History (GER). Major trends and figures from the Enlightenment to the contemporary age. May be repeated
for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W.
[3] (HCA)
GER 4557. Topics in Genre (GER). Main genres of German literature
and culture. Relationship between genres and the social, political, and
cultural developments that lead to their formation and transformation. May
be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201
and 3202W. [3] (HCA)
GER 4558. Business German. [Formerly GER 216, 2216] The culture of
the German business community; differences that hinder communication
between German-speakers and non-German-speakers in the business
setting; development of aural, oral, and written skills. Business practices in
German-speaking countries: advertising and marketing strategies, letters,
vitae, phone calls, and personal interviews. Prerequisites: 3201. [3] (INT)
GER 4563. The Age of Goethe-Weimar 1775 to 1805. [Formerly GER
263] Rational pragmatism, aesthetic innovation in response to Kant and
French Revolution. Readings drawn from Goethe’s Iphigenia, Hermann
und Dorothea, Schiller’s Maria Stuart and Wallenstein, and Wieland’s
Oberon. [3] (INT)
GER 4564. Pleasures and Perils in Nineteenth-Century Theatre.
[Formerly GER 264] The German drama and dramatic theory from Romanticism up to Naturalism with emphasis on selected works by Kleist,
Büchner, Grillparer, and Hebbel. [3] (INT)
GER 4565. Revolutionizing Twentieth-Century Theatre. [Formerly
GER 265] German drama and dramatic theory from Naturalism to the
present. Emphasis on Brecht and post-Brechtian drama. [3] (INT)

GER 4569. Writing under Censorship. [Formerly GER 269] An introduction to the main literary trends and authors of the former East Germany
(1949-1989). [3] (HCA)
GER 4574. Who Am I? German Autobiographies. [Formerly GER 274]
Canonical and non-canonical texts from the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries constructing cultural, religious, and gender identities. Taught in
English. [3] (HCA)
GER 4576. Tales of Travel in Modern German Culture. [Formerly GER
276] German curiosity about other cultures from the late eighteenth century to the present. The role of travel in German culture. The ways in which
German poets, artists, and filmmakers have embraced different social and
natural settings as sites of inspiration, self-discovery, and transformation.
All readings and discussion in German. Prerequisite: 2310W. [3] (INT)

Greek
GRK 1101. Beginning Greek I. [Formerly GRK 201] Classical Greek.
Reading of simplified texts from authors of the fifth and fourth centuries
BCE. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced
Greek language course. Graded basis only. [3] (No AXLE credit)
GRK 1102. Beginning Greek II. [Formerly GRK 202] Readings from classical authors. Introduction to Homeric and Hellenistic Greek. No credit for
students who have earned credit for a more advanced Greek language
course. Graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)
GRK 2201. Intermediate Greek I: Classical and Koiné Greek. [Formerly GRK 203] Review of Greek grammar, and reading from classical and
biblical texts. Prerequisite: 1102. No credit for students who have earned
credit for a more advanced Greek language course. [3] (INT)
GRK 2202. Intermediate Greek II: Homer’s Iliad. [Formerly GRK 204]
Selected reading and interpretation; history and literary characteristics of
the Homeric epic; practice in reading of meter. Prerequisite: 2201. No
credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Greek
language course. [3] (INT)
GRK 3010. The Greek Orators. [Formerly GRK 210] Classical Athenian
orators, with a focus on Lysias and Demosthenes. Historical context, rhetorical technique, and prose style. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
GRK 3020. The Greek Historians. [Formerly GRK 212] Selections from
the major Greek historians, especially Herodotus and Thucydides, and
study of their philosophy of history; investigation of the development of
historical prose writing. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (HCA)
GRK 3040. Readings in Plato and Aristotle. [Formerly GRK 216] Selected readings from the dialogues of Plato and from the ethical writings
of Aristotle. Corollary readings and discussions of the pre-Socratic philosophers and the post-Aristotelian schools. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
GRK 3100. The Greek Tragedians. [Formerly GRK 215] Selections from
the plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. Survey of the development of tragedy. May be repeated for credit with change of subject matter.
Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
GRK 3110. Greek Lyric Poetry. [Formerly GRK 218] The Greek melic,
elegiac, and iambic traditions, with an introduction to the Greek dialects
and special emphasis on Archilochus, Tyrtaeus, Alcaeus, and Sappho.
Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
GRK 3200. Early Christian Writers. [Formerly GRK 240] Writings from
the New Testament to critical works and letters by the Cappadocian fathers. Historical and intellectual context. Rhetoric and style. The Roman
East. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (HCA)

A&S

174
GRK 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly GRK 289] Designed for majors wanting to familiarize themselves with works and authors not covered
in the regular curriculum. Prerequisite: 6 hours above 2202. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students
may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum
of 6 credits total for all semesters of GRK 3850] (No AXLE credit)
GRK 3890. Special Topics in Greek Literature. [Formerly GRK 294]
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in
topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3] (HCA)

Hebrew
HEBR 1101. Elementary Hebrew. [Formerly HEBR 111A] Introduction
to alphabet, the basics of grammar, and elementary conversation. Classes
meet three times per week with an additional two hours a week required in
the language laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for
a more advanced Hebrew language course. [4] (No AXLE credit)
HEBR 1102. Elementary Hebrew. [Formerly HEBR 111B] Continuation
of 1101. Greater stress upon conversation and grammar. Classes meet
three times a week with an additional two hours a week required in the
language laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for
a more advanced Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [4] (INT)
HEBR 2201. Intermediate Hebrew. [Formerly HEBR 113A] Introduction
to modern Hebrew reading, conversation, advanced grammar, and conversation. Classes meet three times a week with an additional three hours
a week spent in independent work in the language laboratory. No credit for
students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language
course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)
HEBR 2202. Intermediate Hebrew. [Formerly HEBR 113B] Continuation
of 2201. Greater emphasis on reading and writing. Classes meet three
times a week with an additional three hours a week spent in independent
work in the language laboratory. No credit for students who have earned
credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 2201.
[3] (INT)
HEBR 2301. Advanced Hebrew Grammar. [Formerly HEBR 201] Emphasis on syntax and grammar supplemented by listening, speaking, and
reading. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
HEBR 2302W. Advanced Hebrew Composition. [Formerly HEBR
202W] Development of writing skills through the study of short stories,
poems, articles, television, and web materials. Prerequisite: 2301. [3] (INT)
HEBR 3851. Independent Study in Modern Hebrew. [Formerly HEBR
289A] May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined
if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total in HEBR
3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
HEBR 3852. Independent Study in Modern Hebrew. [Formerly HEBR
289B] May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined
if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total in HEBR
3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

Hindi-Urdu
HNUR 1101. Elementary Hindi-Urdu I. Speaking-listening skills and basic grammar. Introduction to reading and writing in Devanagari (Hindi) and
Nastaliq (Urdu) scripts and to South Asian cultural materials. No credit for
students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)
HNUR 1102. Elementary Hindi-Urdu II. Reading, writing, speaking, and
listening. Cultural contexts of speaking Hindi-Urdu. No credit for students
who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course.
Prerequisite: 1101. [5] (INT)

vanderbilt university
HNUR 2201. Intermediate Hindi-Urdu I. Conversational skills, writing,
vocabulary, and grammar. Reading texts in Devanagari (Hindi) and Nastaliq (Urdu) scripts. Discussion of cultural materials in Hindi-Urdu. No credit
for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [5] (INT)
HNUR 2202. Intermediate Hindi-Urdu II. Reading, writing, speaking,
and listening with authentic materials. Common and specialized vocabulary. Cultural contexts of spoken Hindi-Urdu. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [5] (INT)
HNUR 3301. Advanced Hindi-Urdu I. Reading, writing, speaking, and
listening with authentic materials. Advanced vocabulary, literary, and cultural studies. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
HNUR 3302. Advanced Hindi-Urdu II. Reading, writing, speaking, and
listening with authentic materials. Advanced vocabulary, literary, and cultural studies. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT)

History
HIST 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly HIST 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 1050. East Asia since 1800. [Formerly HIST 105] Traditional orders
in China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam. Encroachment of European empires. Nineteenth- and twentieth-century social and political revolutions.
Japanese imperialism and the invention of pan-Asianism. WWII in the Pacific; the rise and persistence of Communism. East Asia as a new center
of the global economy in the twenty-first century. [3] (INT)
HIST 1060. Premodern China. [Formerly HIST 106] The development
of Chinese civilization from ancient times to the seventeenth century. The
birth and development of the Chinese identity; Confucianism, Taoism and
Buddhism; the moral, military, and bureaucratic foundations of the imperial institution; the Silk Road; eunuchs and concubines; the commercial
revolution. [3] (INT)
HIST 1070. China from Empire to the People’s Republic. [Formerly
HIST 107] From the seventeenth century to the present. The establishment and expansion of the Qing empire and its clashes with European
empires. Twentieth-century revolutions and war with Japan. Mao and the
making of the Communist state; post-Mao economic and social reforms.
Tibet and ethnic minority issues. [3] (INT)
HIST 1080. Premodern Japan. [Formerly HIST 108] Japanese civilization from ancient times to the Meiji Restoration (1868). Connections between culture and politics; relations with neighboring regions in East Asia.
[3] (INT)
HIST 1090. Modern Japan. [Formerly HIST 109] The political, social,
economic, and cultural history of Japan in the nineteenth century to the
present. Radical changes in the state, society, and economy and the effects of these changes on Japan’s place in the world. [3] (INT)
HIST 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly HIST 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
HIST 1160. Modern South Asia. [Formerly HIST 116] Early modern
South Asia to British imperialism and the independence of India and Pakistan. Colonial society, political movements, caste, gender, and religious
“reform.” Mass nationalism and Gandhi, religious conflict, and the partition
of India and Pakistan. Debates on history and memory. [3] (INT)
HIST 1161. India Before Europe: 3000 B.C.E.-1750 C.E. South Asia from
Indus Valley civilization to British imperialism. Era of Vedas, epics, Mauryas,
and Guptas. Rise of Buddhism and Jainism. Overseas expansion and trade

College of Arts and Science / Courses
with Southeast Asia. Early encounters with Islam, followed by Turkic and
Mughal rule over north India. Portuguese, Dutch, and British trading ventures in India. End of Mughal rule and beginning of British empire. [3] (INT)
HIST 1190. A History of Islam. [Formerly HIST 119] Origins to the present, with emphasis on the modern era. Early and medieval Islam, modernism and fundamentalism. Arabia and the Wahhabis, Iran and Shi’ism,
South Asian syncretism, Muslim minorities in Western Europe and the
United States. Recent Islamic views on human rights, science, economics, and other religions. [3] (INT)
HIST 1200. The Arab Spring. [Formerly HIST 120] Roots of the movement and the course of events. The role played by the West and by print
and other media. Ideologies throughout the Islamic world. Prospects for
the future. [3] (INT)
HIST 1269. Introduction to African Studies. Interdisciplinary exploration of the African experience. Human origins, geography, race and ethnicity, and historical and contemporary issues. Shifting theoretical constructions of Africa alongside the social, cultural, political, and economic forces
at play across the continent. [3] (INT)
HIST 1270. Sub-Saharan Africa: 1400-1800. [Formerly HIST 127] Precolonial history of West and Central Africa. The rise of early empires; cultural history of major groups, the spread of Islam; the Atlantic exchange,
development of the Atlantic plantation complex, and the slave trade. [3]
(INT)
HIST 1280. Africa since 1800: The Revolutionary Years. [Formerly
HIST 128] Political, economic, and social patterns in SubSaharan Africa
from 1800 to the present. The transition from traditional states and societies, through the colonial interlude and the quest for independence to the
modern national setting with its problems of development. Emphasis on
the peoples of Nigeria and South Africa. [3] (INT)
HIST 1350. Western Civilization to 1700. [Formerly HIST 135] JudeoChristian and Greco-Roman foundations to the beginning of the eighteenth century. [3] (INT)
HIST 1355W. Innovation and Renovation in Renaissance Europe.
Renaissance as historical period. Reason versus faith. Materiality. Cultural
interactions across political and economic borders. Works by Dante, Petrarch, and Machiavelli. [3] (HCA)
HIST 1360. Western Civilization since 1700. [Formerly HIST 136] European history from the age of the Enlightenment to the present day. [3] (INT)
HIST 1365W. How to Start Your Own Country: Sovereignty and
State-Formation in Modern History. Seventeenth century to present.
Sovereignty, statehood, and state-formation. Case studies of the Spanish
Empire, British East India Company, Hong Kong, Guantanamo Bay Naval
Station, and Disney World. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)
HIST 1368. Rio de Janeiro: Culture and Citizenship in the Marvelous
City. From the nineteenth century to the present. Race, class, and gender.
Film and literary sources. Modernity and marginalization. [3] (INT)
HIST 1370. Colonial Latin America. [Formerly HIST 137] Survey of Latin
American history from pre-Columbian times to the early nineteenth century. Iberian, Amerindian and African background; the conquest; construction of colonial society and institutions; wars for independence. [3] (INT)
HIST 1378. Social Movements in Latin America, 1780-1912. Citizenship and state formation. Race, gender, and nation. Tupac Amaru insurgency, Brazilian abolitionism, and the first Black political party in Cuba.
[3] (P)
HIST 1380. Modern Latin America. [Formerly HIST 138] A survey of
Latin American history from the early nineteenth century to the present.
Wars for independence; rise of new nations and export-oriented economies; case studies in revolution, nationalism, and reform in the twentieth
century; U.S.-Latin American relations. [3] (INT)
HIST 1383. Slave Resistance in the Americas. Resistance across
North and South America. Slave flight, marronage, and full-blown rebellion. Free black towns in Florida, Mexico, Panama, and Colombia created by former slaves. Problems of evidence and voice through primary
sources of free and enslaved Africans and their descendants. Sources by

175
historians and archaeologists. Art and material culture of rebels. Offered
on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)
HIST 1385W. Disease and Disorder in the Atlantic World. Spanish
Atlantic from Columbus through the Haitian Revolution. Smallpox, slavery,
and rebellion. [3] (INT)
HIST 1390. America to 1776: Discovery to Revolution. [Formerly HIST
139] North American colonies from the Iberian Atlantic dominion through
the zenith of the British Empire. The impact of the European quest for
empire on Native American and West African societies. The emergence
of colonial North America within the context of European imperial rivalries
and Native American political and economic networks. [3] (US)
HIST 1395. The Underground Railroad. Runaway slaves and their assistance from free blacks, whites, and other slaves. Impact on the course
of slavery. Mechanisms of slave holders to capture and return the enslaved. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)
HIST 1400. U.S. 1776-1877: Revolution to Civil War and Reconstruction. [Formerly HIST 140] Independence and establishment of new
political institutions. Westward expansion, economic expansion, formation of a distinctive American culture. Development of mass party politics,
evangelical Protestantism, and reform movements. Sectional conflict over
slavery, Civil War; Reconstruction, and the dawn of the Gilded Age. No
credit for students who earned credit for 170 prior to fall 2008. [3] (US)
HIST 1410. U.S. 1877-1945: Reconstruction through World War II.
[Formerly HIST 141] Economic, political, and social history during the era
of industrialization, mass immigration, the rise of mass culture, the Great
Depression, and the two world wars. [3] (US)
HIST 1420. U.S. Post-1945: Cold War to the Present. [Formerly HIST
142] Political, international, social, and cultural currents that have shaped
contemporary America. [3] (US)
HIST 1422W. FDR, the New Deal, & War. 1930s and 1940s United
States’ domestic and foreign policy during the presidency of Franklin D.
Roosevelt. U.S. global ascendancy and rise of the new welfare state. [3]
(US)
HIST 1425W. Body, Mind, and Soul: Elvis, Dylan, Springsteen and
Postwar America. Rock and roll’s transformation of American culture.
Focus on three pivotal artists and their role in the history of each of their
breakout decades: the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. Readings and listenings
on the African American roots of rock, the gendered dimensions of the
genre, the role of dissent and accommodation in popular music. Issues of
youth, alienation, religion, and individuality. [3] (US)
HIST 1427W. The United States in the Seventies. The 1970s as pivotal
to cultural, economic, and social change. Vietnam, Watergate, and economics of stagflation. Fundamental changes in race and gender relations.
Transformations through and in music, film, and television. U.S. national
politics, concluding with an analysis of the causes of the “Reagan Revolution.” [3] (US)
HIST 1430W. North American Indians and the Environment. North
American Indians’ interaction with their environments over time and space.
Challenges posed by colonial practices and government policies. American Indian communities’ projects in U.S. and Canada to sustain spiritual
and material connection to natural world. [3] (US)
HIST 1438. African American History to 1865. Political, cultural, socioeconomic, and intellectual history of African Americans from their arrival
in colonial America through the end of the U.S. Civil War. History of and
resistance to slavery. [3] (US)
HIST 1440. African American History since 1877. [Formerly HIST 144]
The political, socioeconomic, and intellectual history of African American
people from the end of Reconstruction to the present. Special emphasis
on African American cultural and institutional history and the twentiethcentury protest movements. [3] (US)
HIST 1469. Introduction to Sports History. Race, gender, and empire.
Soccer, baseball, and basketball. U.S. college athletics. Sports and geopolitics. Sports and social issues. [3] (US)

A&S

176
HIST 1470. History of Exploration. [Formerly HIST 147] Antiquity to the
present. Voyages of discovery, including land expeditions and exploration
of extreme depths, high altitudes, and outer space. Technologies of travel
and measurement. Voyaging as exploration of the self. Cultural shifts as
consequences of encounters with new places and peoples. [3] (INT)
HIST 1480. The Darwinian Revolution. [Formerly HIST 148] Intellectual
structure and social context of evolutionary ideas from 1700 to the present. Pre-Darwinian evolutionary theories. Darwin’s life and work. Racial
theories and eugenics. Comparative reception of Darwinism in the United
States and Europe. Conflict between science and religion. [3] (P)
HIST 1500. History of Modern Sciences and Society. [Formerly HIST
150] The end of the Scientific Revolution to the present. Sciences arising
from the fields of Natural Philosophy (physics, astronomy, mathematics,
and chemistry) and Natural History (geology and the life sciences). The
clockwork universe, atomism and the Chemical Revolution; evolutionary
theory (physical, geological, and biological); thermodynamics; and quantum theory. Colonial empires, industry, professional specialization, cultural
modernism, and nuclear fear. [3] (P)
HIST 1510. The Scientific Revolution. [Formerly HIST 151] The production and dissemination of knowledge of the natural world during the
period of the Scientific Revolution, covering roughly from 1450 to 1700.
Cosmology and astrology, navigation, alchemy, religion and philosophy,
and medicine. [3] (P)
HIST 1510L. Scientific Revolution Digital History Lab. Optional lab
accompanying HIST 1510. Digital history tools and building digital projects. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1510. [1] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 1515. Virtual Reality and the Humanities. Workshop in humanistic dimensions of interactive immersive environments including video
games and simulations. History and theory of the medium as well as tools
and practices in their creation. [3] (HCA)
HIST 1520. Science and the Sea. Histories of science and environment.
Effect of science on our conception of the ocean; effect of working at sea
on our practice of science. Navigators’ travel journals, oceanographers’
reports, and recent writings by historians of ocean science. [3] (P)
HIST 1580. Crime and Punishment in Early Modern Europe 14001800 CE. [Formerly HIST 158] Changing definitions of crime, the classification of criminals, and the nature of punishment. “Real” crimes such as
vagrancy, theft, and murder; imaginary crimes such as Jewish ritual murder and witchcraft. Connections with long-term social, legal, and cultural
transformations. [3] (HCA)
HIST 1582W. Witchcraft, Supernatural Phenomena, and Print Culture in England, 1558-1650. Role of printed broadsides, woodcuts,
pamphlets, and treatises in spreading and influencing ideas about the supernatural. Responses to demonic possession, “monstrous” events, and
magic. Social, legal, cultural, and religious contexts. Influence of expectations about gender and class. Development of theological and skeptical
views. [3] (INT)
HIST 1584W. Foreigners and Citizens: Law and Rights in Modern
Europe. French Revolution to late 20th century. Laws, institutions, and
debates over citizenship and human rights. Experiences of refuge, migration, assimilation, and ethnic cleansing. Influence of nationalism, communism, liberalism, secularism, and multiculturalism on discourses of civil and
human rights. [3] (INT)
HIST 1600. European Economic History, 1000-1700. [Formerly HIST
160] From the commercial revolution of High Middle Ages to Industrial
Revolution. Interconnections of economic forces with politics, society, and
cultures. Rise of long distance trade; development of business and accounting techniques; public finance; monetary trends; advent of capitalist
ethic. [3] (SBS)
HIST 1640. History of American Capitalism. [Formerly HIST 164]
The development of American capitalism from the colonial period to the
twenty-first century. The reasons for and effects of capitalist growth; the
ways in which a largely agrarian society emerged as an industrial and commercial leader and shaped the ways Americans produced and lived. The
political, social, and cultural dimensions of economic change. The global

vanderbilt university
context of American development. Serves as repeat credit for students
who completed 294 section 3 in spring 2011. [3] (US)
HIST 1660. American Enterprise. [Formerly HIST 166] Evolution of the
form, organization, and structure of the American business firm from colonial times to the present. Entrepreneurs, labor management, financial
capital, distribution, invention, and government regulation. [3] (US)
HIST 1665. Capital, Labor, and Democracy in the United States.
Nineteenth century to present. Tensions and connections between capitalism and democracy. Basic introduction to the social and political history
of workers, business, politics, and organized labor. Questions of power
and economic inequality as expressed in American political culture. [3] US
HIST 1667. Famous American Trials. Salem witchcraft trials, Aaron
Burr’s treason trial, Emmett Till murder trial, and O.J. Simpson’s murder
trial as lenses to examine central themes in American culture, history, and
memory. [3] (US)
HIST 1690. Sea Power in History. [Formerly HIST 169] U.S. Navy’s role
in foreign and defense policies from the American Revolution to the present. Broad principles, concepts, and elements of sea power throughout
history. Technological advances, interservice relations, strategies, and
governmental policies pertaining to sea power. Designed to meet the
NROTC requirement. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for NS 131. [3] (US)
HIST 1691. Evolution of Warfare. [Formerly HIST 169C] Antiquity to the
present. Evolution of strategic principles. Influence of technological, economic, moral, psychological, and political factors. Case studies from a
soldier’s perspective. Repeat credit for students who have completed NS
2311. [3] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 1693. Fundamentals of Maneuver Warfare. [Replaces HIST 1692
Amphibious Warfare] Broad aspects of warfare and their interactions with
maneuver warfare doctrine. Focus on the United States Marine Corps as
the premier maneuver warfare fighting institution. Historical influences on
current tactical, operational, and strategic implications of maneuver warfare practices. Case studies. Enrollment preference to NROTC students.
Repeat credit for students who have completed HIST 169D or HIST 1692.
[3] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 1700. Western Military History to 1815. [Formerly HIST 170] War
in culture, politics, and society; technology, the Military Revolution and
state-formation. [3] (INT)
HIST 1725W. United States and the Middle East. U.S. involvement in
the Middle East with emphasis on the period after 1945. Special attention
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)
HIST 1730. The U.S. and the Cold War. [Formerly HIST 173] U.S. history, 1945-1991. Emphasis on foreign policy and competition with Soviet
Union. Impact of Cold War on American society. [3] (US)
HIST 1740. The U.S. and the Vietnam War. [Formerly HIST 174] Origins
of American involvement, the reasons for escalation, and the Vietnamese
response to intervention. The impact on America’s domestic politics, the
growth of the anti-war movement, and the economic, social, and cultural
effects of the conflict. [3] (US)
HIST 1760. History of Christian Traditions. [Formerly HIST 176] Origins
to the present. Jewish origins, formation of a Catholic tradition, churchstate relations, and the social and cultural contexts of changing Christian
beliefs and practices. [3] (HCA)
HIST 1770. United States’ Religious History. Religion’s influence on
the body politic and culture of society. Readings from several religious
communities. How race, gender, and ethnicity shape religious identity. [3]
(US)
HIST 1780W. Self and Society in the United States. Selfhood and
identity development from the early Republic to the present. The role of
race, class, and gender but also religion, politics, work, technology, and
media in shaping selves in the United States. Readings include autobiographies, fiction, etiquette manuals, advertisements, and scientific tracts.
Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
HIST 1882W. Japan Through Historical Fiction. Premodern and modern history of Japan through works of Japanese historical fiction. Culture,
religion, and society. Relationship between history and literature. [3] (INT)
HIST 2100. Politics and Catastrophe in Modern China. [Formerly
HIST 202] Influence of politics on culture, society, government, and the
military. The Cultural Revolution to Tiananmen Square. [3] (INT)
HIST 2105. Chinese Thought. [Formerly HIST 203] Confucianism and
Philosophical Daoism. The Confucian Four Books, the Daodejing (Laozi),
Zhuangzi, and Neo-Confucianism. [3] (INT)
HIST 2110. Crisis Simulation in East Asia. [Formerly HIST 204] Strategic motivations and behaviors of international actors. Simulations of the
decision-making process during critical historical moments in the East
Asian context through role-playing and video games. Offered on a graded
basis only. [3] (INT)
HIST 2115. Play and Pleasure in Early Modern Japan. [Formerly HIST
205] Cultural history of Tokugawa Japan (1603-1868), with emphasis on
daily life and popular entertainment in the capital of the warrior government, Edo (present-day Tokyo). Woodblock prints, pleasure quarters, kabuki theatre, commoner carnivals, and popular literature. [3] (INT)
HIST 2120. Japan’s War and Postwar, 1931-1989. [Formerly HIST 206]
Japan’s war in Asia and the Pacific in the mid-twentieth century and its
legacies. The effect of defeat on the nation; reconstruction efforts and
economic success. Hirohito’s death. [3] (INT)
HIST 2130. Russia: Old Regime to Revolution. [Formerly HIST 209]
Russian history from the early nineteenth-century old regime through the
Russian Revolution of 1917. Culture, society, and serfdom; the Great Reforms, ideology, and radicalism; industrialization; modernity in an agrarian
society; twentieth-century revolutions. [3] (INT)
HIST 2135. Russia: The U.S.S.R. and Afterward. [Formerly HIST 210]
Russian history since the 1917 Revolution. Overview of the old regime;
revolution and civil war; the Soviet “Roaring ‘20s”; Stalinism and the totalitarianized society; World War II. Postwar Soviet society and culture;
de-Stalinization and the sixties generation; Gorbachev, perestroika, and
disintegration; contemporary history. [3] (INT)
HIST 2137. The Mandelas: Biography, Struggle, and Legacies. [Formerly HIST 211] Personal and political biographies of Nelson and Winnie Mandela. Their childhood, upbringing, education, professional and
personal lives. Their legacies and lessons as global human rights icons
through the anti-apartheid struggle, arrest, trials, imprisonment, freedom,
presidency, and reconciliation. [3] (INT)
HIST 2138. Blood Diamonds, Blood Oil, Commodities, and Conflicts in Africa. 1870s to the present. Role of diamonds, gold, rubber,
and oil in the resulting conflicts in modern Africa. Multinationals, mineral
extraction, and politics. Poverty, war, child labor, and corruption. Local
and international mining and mineral syndicates. Implications for Africans
and their livelihoods. [3] (INT)
HIST 2140. The Mughal World. [Formerly HIST 211A] Mughal history
from 1500-1750. The early modern world and Islamic empires. Akbar and
Hindu-Muslim interactions in South Asia. Oriental despotism and the idea
of the monarch. Gender and authority. English, Dutch, and Portuguese
views. Trade and the decline of Mughal authority. Globalization, the rise of
Indian entrepreneurs, and the East India company. [3] (INT)
HIST 2150. India and the Indian Ocean. [Formerly HIST 212A] Cultures
along the Indian Ocean coastline from Roman times to 1800, especially
South Asia. Coastal societies and politics, Islam, pilgrimage and trade,
economic zones, and cultural ties. Pirates, seafarers and merchants; diasporas and genealogies. The entry of European trading companies and
debates on trade and empire. [3] (INT)
HIST 2155. Muhammad and Early Islam. [Formerly HIST 213] Early
Arabian society, Judaism and Christianity in Arabia; Muhammad and the
birth of Islam, the conquests, Islamization, Arabization; Jewish influences
in early Islam, the medieval Islamic world. [3] (INT)
HIST 2160. Medicine in Islam. [Formerly HIST 216] Emergence of medicine in the Islamic world. Links with other traditions. Doctors and society;

177
conventional medical practice in hospitals; prophetic medicine; Jewish
and Christian doctors in Islam; pharmacology; developments in the nineteenth-century. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1111
section 21. [3] (INT)
HIST 2170. Islam and the Crusades. [Formerly HIST 217] Ideology;
successes and failures; history and character of Crusader enterprises in
the Holy Land and elsewhere. Muslim religious, political, ideological, and
social reactions. Islamic culture and the West; relations among Crusaders,
Muslims, and Jews. [3] (P)
HIST 2180. Islamic Narratives: Narratives of Islam. History and historiography in Arab Islam. Aims and uses of historical writing in the religious
context. Comparison with other pre-modern cultures. Islamic and nonIslamic sources for Islamic history. Examples from the ancient world, early
Islam, Middle Ages, and the political entity known as the Islamic State. [3]
(HCA)
HIST 2190. Last Empire of Islam. [Formerly HIST 219] The Ottoman
“long nineteenth century,” 1789 to 1923. The Reforms (Tanzimat), state
patriotism, intercommunal relations, national “awakenings,” and the emergence of a public sphere. Historiographical issues, such as perceptions
of the empire as the “Sick Man of Europe” and debates over its decline.
[3] (INT)
HIST 2220. Medieval and Renaissance Italy, 1000-1700. [Formerly
HIST 222] Transformation of Italy from “medieval” society to the “Renaissance.” Cultural, economic, and social developments, especially connections among wealth, status, and patronage. Meaning and applicability of
the term “Renaissance.” [3] (HCA)
HIST 2230. Medieval Europe, 1000-1350. [Formerly HIST 223] Economic expansion and the formation of national states; the medieval Church
and the revival of learning in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. [3] (INT)
HIST 2238. Crime and Criminal Law in Western Antiquity. Ancient
Athens and Rome. Social values and the quest for justice through the legal
system. Definition of offenses, procedures, and penalties. Impact of social,
economic, and legal status as well as gender. No credit for students who
have earned credit for CLAS 3160. [3] (SBS)
HIST 2240. Sex Law. Law concerning marriage, adultery, and homosexuality. Roman, Canon, and Civil Law from Antiquity to the present. [3] (INT)
HIST 2250. Reformation Europe. [Formerly HIST 225] The political, intellectual, and social conditions underlying the Protestant revolt. The Reformation of Luther, Calvin, Zwingli, Loyola, and other religious reformers
considered within the context of the general developments of sixteenthcentury history. [3] (INT)
HIST 2260. Revolutionary Europe, 1789-1815. [Formerly HIST 226]
Political, cultural, and economic upheavals in the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries; the French Revolution and Napoleon, romanticism,
and early industrialization. Emphasis on Britain, France, and Germany. [3]
(INT)
HIST 2270. Nineteenth-Century Europe. [Formerly HIST 227] Major
political, social, economic, and cultural developments from 1815 to 1914.
[3] (INT)
HIST 2280. Europe, 1900-1945. [Formerly HIST 228] Political, socioeconomic, cultural, and colonial history of Europe from 1914 to the fall of
Hitler. [3] (INT)
HIST 2290. Europe since 1945. [Formerly HIST 229] Origins of the Cold
War; political and social transformations, East and West; the breakup of
colonial empires; ideological and military tensions; intellectual and cultural
trends. [3] (INT)
HIST 2293. Muslims in Modern Europe. Eighteenth century to the present. Eastern and Western Europe. Legal, political, and cultural integration
and discrimination; questions of secularism and religious freedom; and
gender, family law, and democracy. Muslim responses to modernity and
formation of global Islamic movements. [3] (HCA)
HIST 2295. The Migrant Crisis in the Netherlands. From the eighteenth century to the present. Political, economic, social, cultural, and religious history of interactions between Dutch people and migrants in the

A&S

178
Netherlands. Migration and identity. Special attention to developments
concerning Muslims in a changing Europe. Offered on a graded basis
only. [3] (INT)
HIST 2300. Twentieth-Century Germany. [Formerly HIST 230] The turbulent history of Germany, as it went from authoritarian state to volatile
democracy, to National Socialist dictatorship, to divided country, and to
reunification. Special emphasis placed on the Nazi dictatorship, its origins
and legacy. [3] (INT)
HIST 2310. France: Renaissance to Revolution. [Formerly HIST 231]
Social and cultural history from 1515 to 1815. Conditions of life, ambitions,
ideas, and tastes of the various social groups. Development of arts, music,
and literature in a sociopolitical context. Causes and consequences of the
French Revolution of 1789. [3] (INT)
HIST 2340. Modern France. [Formerly HIST 234] The fall of Napoleon
in 1815 to the present. Emphasis on politics. Major economic, social, cultural, and intellectual developments. [3] (INT)
HIST 2380. Shakespeare’s Histories and History. [Formerly HIST 238]
Readings from a variety of plays by Shakespeare and his contemporaries.
Significant political and cultural issues from the 1590s in early English history. No credit for students who earned credit for 294 section 2 in fall
2008. [3] (HCA)
HIST 2382. The Rise of the Tudors. [Formerly HIST 239B] Causes and
course of the political crisis in the fifteenth century and the rise of the Tudor
monarchy. Political and religious forces that drove the English Reformation and its immediate consequences. No credit for students who have
completed 2385. [3] (HCA)
HIST 2383. A Monarchy Dissolved? From Good Queen Bess to the
English Civil War. [Formerly HIST 239C] Creation of political stability out
of the turmoil caused by the English Reformation and its dissolution only
forty years later. The relationship between religion and politics, state and
society. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3260. [3] (HCA)
HIST 2385. The Real Tudors. [Formerly HIST 239A] Marital, dynastic history of the Tudors in relation to religious and political change through and
after the English Reformation. Court politics, ideological conflict, and the
rise of an increasingly confessionalized international politics. Offered on a
graded basis only. [3] (HCA)
HIST 2410. Victorian England. [Formerly HIST 241] Cultural values, liberal reform; urbanization; women and gender; imperialism. [3] (INT)
HIST 2450. Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America,
1700-1820. [Formerly HIST 245] Reorganization of the Spanish and Portuguese empires; maturation of transatlantic societies; and revolutions for
independence. [3] (INT)
HIST 2457. Drug Trafficking and Society in Latin America. Narcotics
trafficking between Latin America and the United States. Complexities of
production, transport, and trade. U.S. drug policy and politics. The “drug
war.” Violence, social problems, and political issues related to drugs in
Latin America. Representation of the drug trade and drug culture. [3] (INT)
HIST 2470. Revolutionary Mexico. [Formerly HIST 247] Revolutionary
politics and radical expression in 20th century Mexico. Causes of popular
unrest; violent political change; post-conflict state-building; government
attempts to alter popular culture; radical muralism and graphic art; revolutionary expression and gender; literature and disenchantment. [3] (INT)
HIST 2480. Central America. [Formerly HIST 248] Iberian and Amerindian background, colonial society; independence; growth of the plantation
economy; the U.S. presence; political and social revolutions in the twentieth century. [3] (INT)
HIST 2490. Brazilian Civilization. [Formerly HIST 249] From pre-Columbian times to the present. Clash and fusion of Portuguese, Amerindian,
and African cultures; sugar and slavery; coffee and industrialization; race
relations; dictatorship and democracy in the twentieth century. [3] (INT)
HIST 2510. Reform and Revolution in Latin America. [Formerly HIST
251] Comparative analysis of revolutions and reform movements in twentieth-century Latin America focusing on land tenure, social classes, political
culture, economic structures, and foreign influences. [3] (INT)

vanderbilt university
HIST 2530. African Religions in Americas. [Formerly HIST 253] An
interdisciplinary study of Islam, Christianity, and Animist religions in precolonial Africa; their transformation and practice in the Americas. Case
studies of Brazil, Cuba, and the American South. Material culture studies
and visits to local museum exhibits. [3] (INT)
HIST 2535. Latin America and the United States. [Formerly HIST
253A] The complicated relationship between Latin America and the United
States from the early nineteenth century to the present. Role of ideology,
national security, economic interests, and cultural factors in shaping interAmerican affairs. [3] (INT)
HIST 2540. Race and Nation in Latin America. [Formerly HIST 254A]
Late nineteenth century to the present. Social, political, and cultural constructions of belonging. Citizenship and state building. Immigration, education, urbanization, civil and international wars, and gender and sexuality.
Case studies draw from the Andes, Spanish Caribbean, Southern cone,
and Brazil. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 294 section 2 in fall 2010 or section 1 in fall 2009. [3] (INT)
HIST 2570. Caribbean History, 1492-1983. [Formerly HIST 257] Amerindian society; age of encounter; imperial contest; slavery and abolition.
U.S. influence; independence movements; cultural movements; invasion
of Grenada. [3] (INT)
HIST 2580. American Indian History before 1850. [Formerly HIST 258]
Indian nations’ interaction with each other and with European colonies.
Resistance and adaptation to colonialism. Early development of United
States Indian policy. [3] (US)
HIST 2590. American Indian History since 1850. [Formerly HIST 259]
American Indians in the United States and Canada. Their responses to
government policies and other forces. Cultural, socioeconomic, and political change among Indian communities. [3] (US)
HIST 2595W. Pirates, Plantations, and Power: The English Atlantic World, 1500-1688. [Formerly HIST 243W] Elizabethan era to Glorious
Revolution. Shift from piracy to colonization of Ireland and the Americas.
Cross-cultural contact, race formation, economies of empire, and migration. [3] (US)
HIST 2600. North American Colonial History. [Formerly HIST 260]
European colonization before 1763. Development of North American
colonies from the origins of Spanish colonization to the conclusion of the
Seven Years’ War. Contests among European empires, their interaction
with Native American societies, and their enslavement of African peoples.
[3] (US)
HIST 2610. The Founding Generation. [Formerly HIST 261] American
history from the 1760s to the 1820s. The Revolutionary War, the Constitution, formation of national government. Political conflict, national culture,
commerce, diplomacy, and race and gender in an age of revolution. Primarily for Juniors and Seniors. [3] (US)
HIST 2620. The Old South. [Formerly HIST 262] The South’s origins
in European expansion; the rise of the plantation economy and society,
and its identification with slavery; the differing experiences of whites and
blacks, planters and nonplanters; the relationship of the region to the
larger United States; the Confederate attempt at independence and the
collapse of the slave regime. [3] (US)
HIST 2630. The New South. [Formerly HIST 263] The aftermath of war
and emancipation and the era of Reconstruction; social change and dislocation in the late nineteenth century; the Populist Revolt; the origins of
segregation and one-party politics. Twentieth-century efforts to modernize the region; the economic, political, and Civil Rights revolutions of the
mid-twentieth century; the South in modern American society and politics.
[3] (US)
HIST 2640. Appalachia. [Formerly HIST 264] The region from first European intrusions to the present. Frontier-era white-indigenous contact,
antebellum society and economy, relations with the slave South, the Civil
War and postwar politics, increasing social strainings, industrialization and
labor conflict, poverty and outmigration. Examination of mountain culture,
tourism, and the construction of the “hillbilly” image. [3] (US)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
HIST 2650. The U.S. in the Era of the Civil War. [Formerly HIST 265]
Sectional conflict, secession, the Southern War for Independence, and
Reconstruction; 1850-1877. [3] (US)
HIST 2655. Historic Black Nashville. From settlement through the Civil
War. Secondary literature and archival research to identify significant black
history sites in Nashville. No credit for students who have earned credit for
UNIV 2655. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)
HIST 2660. The Birth of Modern Capitalism and Human Trafficking. [Formerly HIST 266] Closure of the Atlantic slave trade in eighteenth
and nineteenth-century Britain and the United States. State formation, the
birth of modern human rights discourse, and ideas about compassionate
capitalism. [3] (INT)
HIST 2662. Slavery in the United States. History of American slavery,
from the formation of a slave power in the seventeenth century to the
defeat of the slaveholders’ republic in the wake of the Civil War. [3] (US)
HIST 2685. Race and U.S. Visual Culture. From the 1700s to the present. Iconic texts, major themes, and transformative figures in the representational history of African Americans. Art and photography as strategies
for racial uplift. Intra-racial satire. Black entertainment culture and societal
imagery. Issues of gender, class, and sexuality. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 294-01 offered spring 2014 or 294-01 offered
spring 2012. [3] (P)

179
HIST 2735. Debating America in the World, 1890-2010. [Formerly
HIST 272E] Debates about the U.S. role in shaping the twentieth century.
War; colonialism and anti-colonialism; immigration; participation in international institutions. [3] (US)
HIST 2740. Immigration, the United States, and the World. Mid-nineteenth century to present. Relationship between U.S. immigration policy
and politics; international relations. Impacts of war, diplomacy, and international pressure on U.S. immigration policy. [3] (US)
HIST 2749. American Thought to 1865. U.S. intellectual tradition from
the colonial era to the Civil War. Popular thinkers and elite intellectuals including John Winthrop, Thomas Jefferson, Frederick Douglass, and Abraham Lincoln. Race, slavery, nation, and gender. Intellectual movements
ranging from abolitionism to Social Darwinism. [3] (US)
HIST 2750. American Intellectual History since 1865. [Formerly HIST
275A] Modern U.S. social thought. Debates over progress, science, nationalism, race, and economy. Ideas in their cultural context. Popular as
well as elite thinkers. [3] (HCA)
HIST 2752. African American Intellectual History Since 1776. From
the American Revolution to the present. Phillis Wheatley, Frederick Douglass, W.E.B. Du Bois, Amy Jacques Garvey, and Barack Obama. Black
abolitionism, Pan-Africanism, black internationalism, Marxism, and black
feminism. [3] (US)

HIST 2690. The Civil Rights Movement. [Formerly HIST 269] Following two decades of progress from Brown v. Board of Education in 1954
toward racial justice and equality in the United States. Leaders, organizations, and milestones. [3] (US)

HIST 2760. The Historian and the Law. Contemporary legal history and
the role of law in shaping historical research. Doctrinal history, legal culture, colonial encounters, and crime and violence. Formal versus informal
modes of state and community control and sanction. [3] (SBS)

HIST 2691. Barack Obama: Man and President. Examination of
Obama’s presidency. Exploration of background influences and their impact in domestic & foreign affairs. [3] (US)

HIST 2780. Superhuman Civilization. [Formerly HIST 153] Trends in human biological enhancement through the re-engineering of basic physical
and mental traits. Debates over transhumanism, designer babies, neuroethics, and technological determinism. Long-term implications for social
justice and human identity. [3] (P)

HIST 2700. The U.S. and the World. [Formerly HIST 270] From the winning of independence to the Great Depression. Relationships among foreign policy, ideology, domestic politics, and social and economic change.
[3] (US)
HIST 2710. The U.S. as a World Power. [Formerly HIST 271] From the
origins of World War II, through the Cold War, to the present day. Relationships among foreign policy ideology, domestic politics, and social
economic change. [3] (US)
HIST 2720. World War II. [Formerly HIST 172] Origins and causes of
the global conflict; the six years of military campaigns; politics and diplomacy of war-making; race as a factor shaping the war in Europe and Asia.
Impact of technological innovations; social and economic aspects of the
struggle, as well as its moral and psychological implications. [3] (INT)
HIST 2721. Globalizing American History, 1870-1940. [Formerly HIST
272A] Immigration; diasporic social movements; transnational social reform campaigns; military, colonial, and corporate empire-building; expansion of missionary activity; United States’ participation in World War I. [3]
(US)
HIST 2722. Globalizing American History, 1940-2010. [Formerly HIST
272B] The rise of U.S. world power after 1940 and the transformation of
American society through its global interactions. Impact of transnational
mobility and communications, connected social movements, war and militarization, and mass immigration. [3] (US)
HIST 2725. Race, Power, and Modernity. [Formerly HIST 272C] Historical approaches to race as a modern system of power and difference. The
United States experience in comparative and transnational perspective.
Race as an historical and socially-constructed ideological system. Race
intersecting with nationality, region, class and gender. Race in the making
of space, citizenship, and economic institutions. [3] (US)
HIST 2730. American Masculinities. [Formerly HIST 272D] Changing
definitions of manhood and masculinity from the colonial period to the
post-9/11 era. The rise of democratic politics, industrialization, slavery and
emancipation, feminist politics, and the growth of the global power of the
United States. [3] (US)

HIST 2800. Modern Medicine. [Formerly HIST 280] Scientific, social,
and cultural factors influencing the rise of modern medicine. Europe and
the U.S., 1750 to the present. [3] (P)
HIST 2810. Women, Health, and Sexuality. [Formerly HIST 281] Women as patients and healers in the U.S. from 1750 to the present. Topics include women’s diseases and treatments; medical constructions of
gender, sexuality; childbirth, birth control, abortion; midwives, nurses, and
doctors. [3] (US)
HIST 2835. Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition to 1700.
[Formerly HIST 183] Politics, war, and masculinity; Christianity and sexuality; changing ideas about gender roles and sexual practices. [3] (P)
HIST 2840. Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition since
1700. [Formerly HIST 184] Modern masculinity, femininity, and gender
roles; origins of identity politics and changing sexual norms; contemporary
feminist issues. [3] (P)
HIST 2845. Race, Gender, and Slave Emancipation. Comparative and
Atlantic world history. Haiti, United States, Caribbean, Brazil, and South
Africa. Novels, plays, and slave narratives. Slavery and post-emancipation.
[3] (INT)
HIST 2855. Women and Gender in the U.S. to 1865. [Formerly HIST
185] Social and cultural history of gender, race, and sexuality as represented in literary, legal and artistic texts. Exploration of Native American
conquest, captivity narratives, abolitionism and sentimental fiction, nationalism and gender ideas. [3] (US)
HIST 2860. Women and Gender in the U.S. since 1865. [Formerly
HIST 186] Social and cultural history of the intertwined ideas and practices of gender, race, and sexuality. Exploration of experiences, representations, and activism in feminist and gay rights movements, interracial
unions, marriage and the family, black women’s activism, suffrage, and
sexual revolutions. [3] (US)
HIST 3000W. The History Workshop. [Formerly HIST 200W] Introduction to the “historian’s craft.” Reconstructing the past using primary documents such as diaries, letters, memoirs, and declassified government

A&S

180

vanderbilt university

papers. Methods of historical research and reasoning through individual
projects. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)

urbanization. Paris as a literary, artistic, and consumer capital; its changing
physical landscape. Immigration and the globalization of Paris. [3] (INT)

HIST 3010. Pornography and Prostitution in History. [Formerly HIST
187] Commercialization of the sex trade, Renaissance to the present.
Political scandal, capitalism, and globalization; effects of technological
change, from the printing press to the Internet. Readings from anthropology, psychology, and feminist theory. [3] (P)

HIST 3190. Religion, Culture, and Commerce: The World Economy
in Historical Perspective. [Formerly HIST 288A] Cross-cultural trade in a
broad chronological and geographical framework. Pre-modern and modern times, western and non-western locales. The role of religion in economic exchange and the movement of commodities. Offered on a graded
basis only. [3] (HCA)

HIST 3040. Health and the African American Experience. [Formerly
HIST 284B] Disparities in the health care of African Americans, the training of black professionals, and the role of black medical institutions. The
intersection between black civic involvement and health care delivery;
the disproportionate impact of disease and epidemics within the African
American population. [3] (US)
HIST 3045W. Eugenics in the U.S., 1865-present. [Formerly HIST
284D] Comparative perspective. Compulsory sterilization, restrictive immigration acts, “fitter family” contests, medical genetics, and eugenic
counseling. Ideas and practices shaped by attitudes toward race, gender,
class, and disability. No credit for students who earned credit for HONS
182 section 26 in fall 2012. [3] (US)
HIST 3050. Innovation. [Formerly HIST 285C] Origin, reception, and cultural impact of technological innovation. New technologies from the midnineteenth century through present-day Silicon Valley and their technical,
social, economic, and political dimensions. [3] (P)
HIST 3070W. Science, Technology, and Modernity. [Formerly HIST
285W] Social, cultural, intellectual, and artistic responses to the challenges
posed by modern science and technology from the mid-nineteenth to the
mid-twentieth centuries. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P)
HIST 3090. Tokyo: History and Image. [Formerly HIST 286C] Tokyo and
its representation in various media from the mid-nineteenth century to the
present and imaginings of the future. The city’s physical development and
image in photographs, films, novels, essays, and other textual and visual
materials produced within Japan and beyond. [3] (INT)
HIST 3100. Pirates of the Caribbean. [Formerly HIST 286D] Imperial
competition for control of the Caribbean and state-sponsored piracy. The
economic and political consequences of piracy in the Caribbean. The life
of pirates aboard ship and in port. [3] (INT)
HIST 3112. China and the World. China’s role in global currents since
the seventeenth century. China as engine of early-modern global trade.
The Chinese diaspora’s transnational impact. Cosmopolitan semi-colonial
cities (such as Shanghai) as incubators of global modernity. China as an
innovator and exporter of cultural “goods” in the twentieth century, from
revolution to modes of health and healing. [3] (INT)
HIST 3120. Weimar Germany: Modernism and Modernity, 19181933. [Formerly HIST 286G] Culture and politics. Mass politics, mass
media, economic crisis, and social tensions. Architecture, film, theater,
painting, and philosophy. [3] (HCA)
HIST 3140. History of New Orleans. [Formerly HIST 287B] The city
since its founding. Interactions between urban society and natural environment; historical and cultural significance of New Orleans in light of postKatrina disaster and reconstruction. [3] (US)
HIST 3150. Cities of Europe and the Middle East. [Formerly HIST
287C] Cities of “East” and “West” in the modern period; distinguishing
characteristics and shared patterns of urban modernity across different
geographies. Conceptions of the European, Middle Eastern, and Islamic
metropolis. [3] (INT)
HIST 3170. The Federalist Papers. [Formerly HIST 287E] Classic works
on American constitutionalism and government and their views on human
nature and republicanism. The framers’ rejection of democracy and fear of
legislative abuses. The Constitution’s emphasis on institutional protections
for liberty and checking abuses of power. [3] (US)
HIST 3180. Making of Modern Paris. [Formerly HIST 287G] The social and cultural history of Paris from the old regime to the present. Paris
versus the French provinces; revolutionary upheavals; challenges of rapid

HIST 3200. Poverty, Economy, and Society in Sub-Saharan Africa.
[Formerly HIST 288B] History of poverty from pre-colonial times to the
present. The evolution of economic systems and trading; impacts of transoceanic slave, commodity trading, and colonialism on Africans’ standards
of living; contemporary African economic challenges of underdevelopment, debt, foreign aid, fair trade, and globalization. No credit for students
who earned credit for 295 section 3 in spring 2007 or 294 section 1 in fall
2008. [3] (INT)
HIST 3210. Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Medieval Spain. [Formerly HIST 288C] Coexistence and conflict from 711 to 1492. The blend
of cultures, languages, religions, and societies under both Christian and
Islamic rule. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who
have earned credit for JS 1111 section 1. [3] (INT)
HIST 3220W. Images of India. [Formerly HIST 288D] Images in and of
South Asia as studied through maps, religious imagery, print culture, cinema, and architecture. The politics of visual stereotypes of India. The visual
history of Orientalism, modernity, gender, and religion in South Asia. [3]
(INT)
HIST 3230. The Art of Empire. [Formerly HIST 288E] Visual media in
the establishment of modern empires, with emphasis on Western Europe.
Image-making and power; art in cultural exchange and the definition of
race, ethnicity, and gender. [3] (HCA)
HIST 3240W. Culture of the Sixties in Europe and the U.S. [Formerly
HIST 288G] Youth, rock ’n roll, sexual attitudes, black power, counterculture, and conservative reaction. Cultural revolution or myth. [3] (INT)
HIST 3260. Revolutionary England, 1603-1710. [Formerly HIST 289A]
Causes, nature, and consequences of the English Revolution and the
Glorious Revolution. Religious struggle, the fiscal-military state; political
thought; parliament and party politics. The Stuart dynasty; the English Republic; court culture and civil war. [3] (HCA)
HIST 3270. Religion and the Occult in Early Modern Europe. [Formerly HIST 289D] Popular and learned ideas about religion and the supernatural within the context of the religious reforms of the sixteenth century.
Alchemical and astrological practices to ghosts, werewolves, fairies, and
other supernatural beings. The witch craze phenomenon of 1560-1650.
Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who earned credit
for 295 section 1 in fall 2011. [3] (HCA)
HIST 3275. Religion and Popular Culture in Nineteenth-Century Europe. [Formerly HIST 289E] Popular religious beliefs and practices in their
social, cultural, political, and gender contexts. Concentration on Britain,
France, and Germany. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)
HIST 3280. Popular Cultures in Modern Latin America. [Formerly
HIST 290A] 1800 to the present. Music, theater, literature, art, dance, and
religion. Cultural performance among popular groups and their attempts to
construct, control, and commercialize expression. [3] (INT)
HIST 3746. Workshop in English and History. [Formerly HIST 291]
(Also listed as English 3746) Team-taught by a historian and an interdisciplinary scholar. Explores intersection of disciplines through close examination of texts in historical context. May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. Preference to students majoring
in the English-History program. [3] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly HIST 296] A program of reading in one field of history to be selected in consultation with an adviser.
Normally limited to qualified majors in history. Approval of faculty adviser
and director of undergraduate studies required. May be repeated for credit

College of Arts and Science / Courses
once if there is no duplication in topic and not twice from the same instructor, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment.
[1-3; maximum of 6 credits for all semesters of HIST 3850] (No AXLE
credit)
HIST 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly HIST 293A] Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad
range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs. In some
cases, such as historical societies or museums, history is a central part of
the organization’s missions; in other cases, the student will play a role in
managing the institution’s records or writing its history. Two options are
available. (1) full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, 3
hours in 3881, and 3 hours in 3882. (2) Part-time: 6-9 hours total, including 3-6 hours in 3880 and 3 hours in either 3881 or 3882. To be accepted
for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6
hours of prior work in history; they must submit a specific plan for the
internship to the director of undergraduate studies. After completing the
internship, all students must write a thorough report. Must be taken Pass/
Fail and concurrently with 3881 and/or 3882. These hours may not be
included in the minimum hours required for the history major. Corequisite:
3881 and/or 3882. [3-9] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 3882. Internship Readings. [Formerly HIST 293C] Under faculty
supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad
range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs. In some
cases, such as historical societies or museums, history is a central part
of the organization’s missions; in other cases, the student will play a role
in managing the institution’s records or writing its history. Two options
are available. (1) full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880,
3 hours in 3881, and 3 hours in 3882. (2) Part-time: 6-9 hours total, including 3-6 hours in 3880 and 3 hours in either 3881 or 3882. To be accepted for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average
and 6 hours of prior work in history; they must submit a specific plan for
the internship to the director of undergraduate studies. After completing
the internship, all students must write a thorough report. Readings and a
substantial interpretive essay on topics related to the internship training,
under the supervision of a member of the Vanderbilt Department of History. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 3883. Internship Research. [Formerly HIST 293B] Under faculty
supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad
range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs. In some
cases, such as historical societies or museums, history is a central part of
the organization’s missions; in other cases, the student will play a role in
managing the institution’s records or writing its history. Two options are
available. (1) full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, 3
hours in 3882, and 3 hours in 3883. (2) Part-time: 6-9 hours total, including 3-6 hours in 3880 and 3 hours in either 3882 or 3883. To be accepted
for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6
hours of prior work in history; they must submit a specific plan for the
internship to the director of undergraduate studies. After completing the
internship, all students must write a thorough report. Students will write
a substantial research paper under the supervision of a member of the
Vanderbilt Department of History. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 3890. Selected Topics in History. [Formerly HIST 294] May be
repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[3] (No AXLE credit)

181
topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HIST 4960]
(No AXLE credit)
HIST 4980. Senior Honors Research Seminar. [Formerly HIST 298A]
Presentation and discussion of drafts and chapters of honors theses in
progress. Offered on a graded basis only. Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 4981. Senior Honors Research Seminar. [Formerly HIST 298B]
Continuation of 4980. Offered on a graded basis only. Open only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Prerequisite: 4980. Corequisite: 4999. [3] (No AXLE credit)
HIST 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly HIST 299] Writing an honors thesis under the supervision of a thesis adviser and the Director of
Honors. Open only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 4980. Corequisite 4981. [3]
(No AXLE credit)

History of Art
HART 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly HART 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
HART 1100. History of Western Art: Ancient to Medieval. [Formerly
HART 110] Visual and material culture of Europe and the Ancient Near
East from the Paleolithic through the late Medieval period. Egypt, Greece,
and Rome; early Christianity and Islam. Form, content, and meaning of
works of art and architecture in their cultural context. [3] (HCA)
HART 1105. History of Western Art: Renaissance to Modern. [Formerly HART 111] Major artistic movements from the Renaissance to the
Modern era and the developments in painting, sculpture, and architecture.
Works of specific artists and cultural factors that affect the visual arts from
production to reception. [3] (HCA)
HART 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly HART 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
HART 1120. History of Western Architecture. [Formerly HART 112]
Architecture in Europe, Western Asia, and North America from the early
first millennium BCE to the present. Form and function; historical, social,
and spatial contexts; architects and patrons. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 112a. [3] (HCA)
HART 1121. History of Western Architecture I. [Formerly 112A] From
prehistoric Europe and Western Asia to Renaissance Italy and the Ottoman Golden Age. Form and function; historical, social, spatial contexts;
architects and patrons. No credit for students who have earned credit for
1120. [3] (HCA)
HART 1200. Arts of East Asia. [Formerly HART 120] A survey of sculpture, painting, and architecture in China, Japan, and Korea. Historical, religious, philosophical, and cultural background. [3] (INT)

HIST 3980. Junior Honors Seminar in History. [Formerly HIST 297]
The first semester of a three-semester sequence of honors study leading to the writing of an honors thesis in history. Introduction to historical
thinking, research, and writing. Readings from the major fields of historical
scholarship, representing the United States, Europe, Latin America, and
Asia. Open to juniors beginning honors work in history, or to qualified history majors with the approval of the director of undergraduate studies. [3]
(No AXLE credit)

HART 1205. Arts of South and Southeast Asia. [Formerly HART 125]
Second millennium BCE to present. Formation of political and social identities as reflected in artistic productions. Development of artistic traditions
in response to cultural exchange and political dynamics. [3] (INT)

HIST 4960. Majors Seminar. [Formerly HIST 295] Advanced reading,
research, and writing. Topics vary. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited
to juniors and seniors and intended primarily for history majors. Prerequisite: 3000W. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in

HART 1220. History of Asian Architecture. [Formerly HART 122] Cultural traditions of Asia from the first millennium BCE to the nineteenth
century through the study of architecture. Cities, temples, and domestic

HART 1210W. Art and Ritual in Asia. From prehistory to the present.
Social and religious functions of the arts of China, India, Japan, Korea, and
Himalayas. Select examples explored in museum visits, lectures, discussions, and varied writing projects. [3] (INT)

A&S

182
structures of China, Japan, Korea, South Asia (India and Pakistan), and
Southeast Asia. [3] (INT)
HART 1285W. Introduction to Medieval Art. From the third to fifteenth
century; Late Antique period to Late Gothic period. Architecture, sculpture, painting, and the minor arts of Western Europe in historical context,
including Byzantine and Islamic art. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 2270 or 2285. [3] (INT)
HART 1300. Monuments and Masterpieces. [Formerly HART 130] The
social and cultural history of the world in fourteen great works, including
the Athenian Parthenon, the Pantheon in Rome, the Konjikido in Japan,
Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel, and the U.S. Capitol. Sculpture, painting,
architecture, and the decorative arts. [3] (INT)
HART 1330W. Heaven on Earth: Sacred Sites in World History. From
prehistory to the 19th century. Great works of world religious architecture
in their social and cultural context. Monuments, temples, tombs, shrines,
and other sacred sites. Cross-cultural and trans-historical comparative
perspective. How formal attributes of space and architecture shape religious experience and meaning. [3] (SBS)
HART 1400. U.S. Icons and Monuments. [Formerly HART 140] From
1776 to present. How and why images of people, historical events, and
symbols are revered. Implications for national identity, historical memory,
consumerism, and political ideologies. The U.S. Capitol, Statue of Liberty,
Mount Rushmore, Marilyn Monroe, and Michael Jordan. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1111 section 13. [3] (US)
HART 1500W. Impressionism. Painting style developed by Monet,
Renoir, Pissarro, Cassatt, Morisot, and others, with emphasis on changing atmospheric effects. Work of the French Impressionists from formal,
social, political, and intellectual perspectives. Impact of French Impressionism across Europe and North America. [3] (HCA)
HART 1750W. African American Arts. Blackness and black culture as
subject and context for African American visual arts from the 20th and
21st centuries. Emphasis on arts derived from African American cultural
perspectives. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2750. [3]
(P)
HART 2110. Arts of China. [Formerly HART 252] Artistic production from
the Neolithic period through the Qing dynasty in relation to religious and
cultural contexts. [3] (HCA)
HART 2130. Arts of Japan. [Formerly HART 253] Artistic production
from the Neolithic through Meiji periods in relation to religious and cultural
contexts. [3] (HCA)
HART 2150. East Asian Architecture and Gardens. [Formerly HART
251] East Asian religious, vernacular, and garden architecture from the
second century CE to the present. Influence of Buddhism on East Asian
architecture, fengshui, and site selection, garden as religious landscape,
Asia in modern architecture. [3] (HCA)
HART 2170. Religion and politics in South and Southeast Asian Art.
[Formerly HART 246] Use of Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain images as political communication in South and Southeast Asia from the time of Buddha
(480-400 BC) to the present. The original patronage of temples and religious icons, and their reappropriation in ancient and modern times. [3]
(INT)
HART 2175. Modern and Contemporary Indian Architecture. From
nineteenth-century British colonial rule to the present. Built environment
of Indian subcontinent in local and global contexts. Eighteenth-century
Jaipur and urban planning, the British Raj, Calcutta, Allahabad, and Edwin
Lutyens’ New Delhi. Le Corbusier, Louis Kahn, the Neo-Gothic of Bombay, and contemporary architecture. [3] (INT)
HART 2180. Islamic Art and Architecture. [Formerly HART 244] Visual and building traditions from the seventh through twentieth centuries.
Cultural, sacred, political, and historical forces shaping art from Islamic
Spain and Turkey to Iran and India. Dome of the Rock, the Alhambra, the
Suleymaniye mosque, Persian illustrated manuscripts, and the Taj Mahal.
[3] (INT)

vanderbilt university
HART 2192. Modern and Contemporary African Art. 1940 to present. Painting, sculpture, photography, performance and film examined in
relationship to political, cultural, historical, and aesthetic contexts on and
off the African continent. Tradition, colonialism and post-colonialism, diaspora, nationalism, and gender. Issues regarding collecting, exhibiting, and
selling contemporary African art. [3] (INT)
HART 2210. Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt. [Formerly HART
268] Art, architecture, and culture of Egypt from the fourth millennium
through the Old, Middle, and New Kingdoms. Sculpture, wall painting, architecture, and material culture. Serves as repeat credit for students who
have completed CLAS 217. [3] (HCA)
HART 2220. Greek Art and Architecture. [Formerly HART 255] The
Bronze Age, including the Minoans and Myceneans, through the Hellenistic period. The social and cultural contexts of material and visual culture.
Vase-painting, sculpture, architecture, and more utilitarian artifacts. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 2222, 257, 258, or CLAS
2200 or 2210. [3] (HCA)
HART 2260. The Art of Pagans, Christians, and Jews. [Formerly
HART 207] Religious art of the Roman Empire in late antiquity. Visual art
reflecting religious beliefs and practices. Greco-Roman cults, early Christianity, and Rabbinical Judaism. [3] (HCA)
HART 2270. Early Christian and Byzantine Art. [Formerly HART 210]
The development of architecture, sculpture, painting, and the minor arts
from the third through eleventh centuries. [3] (HCA)
HART 2275. The Cross and the Crescent: Byzantine-Islamic Confluences in Art. Developments at the interface of Byzantium and early
Muslim empires, ca. 500-1000 C.E. Cross-cultural processes shaping visual sensibilities. Doctrinal issues and aniconism mirrored in architecture,
ornament, mosaics, illuminated manuscripts, coinage. Exemplary sites:
San Vitale in Ravenna, Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, Dome of the Rock in
Jerusalem, and the Umayyad mosque in Damascus. [3] (INT)
HART 2285. Medieval Art. [Formerly HART 211] The development of
architecture, sculpture, painting, and the minor arts in Europe from the
eleventh through the fifteenth centuries. [3] (HCA)
HART 2288. Art of the Book. Material and visual composition of medieval manuscripts; working with medieval and contemporary artists’ books
in Vanderbilt’s Special Collections. Audience, changing popularity of texts
and illustrations, and concerns of patrons and artists. Exemplary works
include the “Book of Kells,” “Luttrell Psalter,” and “Tres Riches Heures.”
Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)
HART 2290. Gothic Paris. From the twelfth to the fifteenth century. Architecture, sculpture, painting, and the luxury arts. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 2285. [3] (INT)
HART 2310. Italian Art to 1500. [Formerly HART 218] Early development of art and architecture primarily in central Italy from the late thirteenth
through the fifteenth centuries. The works of Giotto, Duccio, Donatello,
Masaccio, and Botticelli. The age of the Medici in Florence. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3320 or 3320W. [3] (HCA)
HART 2320W. The Italian Renaissance Workshop. Development of
artists’ shops, 14th into 16th century. Organization and production. Painting and sculpture techniques. Role of artists in society. Fra’Angelico, Andrea del Verrocchio and the young Leonardo da Vinci, and Sandro Botticelli. Firsthand study of works in the Kress Collection at Vanderbilt. Offered
on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for
3320W. [3] (HCA)
HART 2325. Great Masters of the Italian Renaissance. From the late
Gothic to the High Renaissance. Landmarks in painting, sculpture, and
architecture in central Italy. Trecento Sienese masters; Giotto, Donatello,
Botticelli, and Leonardo in Florence; and Michelangelo and Raffaello in
Rome. Tempera and fresco technique; civic, ecclesiastic, and domestic buildings; and stylistic progression. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 2310. [3] (INT)
HART 2330. Italian Renaissance Art after 1500. [Formerly HART 219]
High Renaissance and Mannerist art in sixteenth-century Italy, considering
Florentine masters such as Leonardo, Michelangelo, and Pontormo, the

College of Arts and Science / Courses
Roman school of Raphael, and the Venetians from Giorgione and Titian to
Tintoretto. [3] (HCA)
HART 2360. Northern Renaissance Art. [Formerly HART 212] Painting,
sculpture, and graphic arts in the Low Countries, France, and Germany
from the end of the fourteenth century through the Reformation. Historical, social, religious, and stylistic factors. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 2362 or 3366. [3] (HCA)
HART 2362. Fifteenth-Century Northern European Art. [Formerly
HART 214] Painting, sculpture, prints, and court art in the Low Countries,
France, and Germany. Historical, social, economic, religious, and technical analysis. Jan van Eyck, Rogier van der Weyden, and Hieronymus
Bosch. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2360. [3] (HCA)
HART 2390. Seventeenth-Century Art. [Formerly HART 221] European
painting, sculpture, architecture, and graphic arts. Caravaggio, Bernini,
Velazquez, Rubens, and Rembrandt. [3] (HCA)
HART 2600. Eighteenth-Century Art. [Formerly HART 224] The history
of European painting, sculpture, and printmaking from the Late Baroque
era to the rise of Neoclassicism (1675-1775). Geographical focus on Italy
and France. Artists include Maratti, Rusconi, Carriera, Tiepolo, Watteau,
Chardin, Fragonard, and others. [3] (HCA)
HART 2620. Nineteenth-Century European Art. [Formerly HART 230]
French Revolution to the early twentieth century. International context for
artistic movements. The rise of abstraction and the relationship between
art, politics, and social change. [3] (INT)
HART 2622. Neoclassicism and Romanticism. [Formerly HART 226] A
survey of major artists and monuments of visual culture considered in their
political, social, economic, spiritual, and aesthetic contexts from 1760 to
1840. [3] (HCA)
HART 2625. French Art in the Age of Impressionism. French painting, sculpture, and drawing in its social, political, aesthetic, academic, and
spiritual context from 1848 to 1886. The Social Realism of Daumier and
Courbet; Manet and Aesthetic Realism; Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Degas,
Morisot, and Impressionism; and the rise of Neo- and Post-Impressionism
with Seurat and van Gogh. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 1500W or 4960-01 offered fall 2015. [3] (INT)
HART 2650. Nineteenth-Century Architecture: Theory and Practice.
[Formerly HART 229] European and North American architecture from the
French Revolution to the First World War. The relationships among architecture and technology, political regimes, social formations, and conceptions of history. Neoclassicism, Gothic Revival, Second Empire, the Artsand-Crafts Movement, and Commercial Architecture. [3] (HCA)
HART 2660. American Art to 1865. [Formerly HART 240] Painting and
sculpture of the United States from Colonial times to 1865 with an emphasis on iconography, social history, race, and gender. [3] (US)
HART 2665. The Vanderbilts as Patrons: Taste-Makers of GildedAge Art and Architecture. The Vanderbilts’ roles as patrons and tastemakers in translation of European architectural and artistic styles to the
United States. Famed Vanderbilt estates such as Biltmore in Asheville, NC
and the Breakers in Newport, RI. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 288 01 offered spring 2015. [3] (HCA)
HART 2680. British Art: Tudor to Victorian. [Formerly HART 222] Art
and visual culture in the British Isles from the reign of Henry VIII in the
sixteenth century to Queen Victoria and the rise of the pre-Raphaelites
in the nineteenth century. Portraiture and landscape painting, relationship between art and empire, rise of the Royal Academy, and patterns
of patronage. Holbein, Hogarth, Gainsborough, Reynolds, Lawrence, and
Turner. [3] (HCA)
HART 2708. Twentieth-Century British Art. [Formerly HART 223]
Painting, sculpture, installation, film and video, and performance in the
context of national culture and political history. [3] (HCA)
HART 2710. Twentieth-Century European Art. [Formerly HART 231]
Painting, sculpture, and architecture; stressing a social-historical approach to the study of style. [3] (HCA)

183
HART 2720. Modern Architecture. [Formerly HART 232] A survey of
nineteenth-century styles from Federal to Victorian, and major twentiethcentury architects and designers from Wright and the Bauhaus to Eames
and Kahn. City planning and preservation. [3] (HCA)
HART 2722. Modern Art and Architecture in Paris. [Formerly HART
235] Painting, sculpture, photography, and architecture. Maymester
course; first two weeks at Vanderbilt, last two weeks in Paris. [3] (HCA)
HART 2750. African American Art. [Formerly HART 239] Colonial Era to
the present. Artwork and artists in their political, cultural, social, historical,
and aesthetic contexts. Relationship between race and representation. [3]
(P)
HART 2755. Women in Art since 1850. Painting, sculpture, photography, and performance by European and American women artists. Intersections of gender, race, and sexuality in visual production. Feminist
methods in art history. [3] (P)
HART 2760. Early American Modernism, 1865-1945. [Formerly HART
241] Painting and sculpture of the United States between the Civil War
and the Second World War with emphasis on iconography, social history,
class, and gender. [3] (US)
HART 2765. Art since 1945. [Formerly HART 242] A survey of art produced in the United States and Europe since 1945 with an emphasis upon
theory and the social and intellectual factors. [3] (US)
HART 2775. History of Prints. Woodcut, engraving, etching, and lithography from the fifteenth to the twentieth century. Scientific, devotional, ornamental, and documentary functions. Dürer, Piranesi, Hogarth, Daumier,
and Kollwitz. Advances in technique and marketing, relationship to fine art,
and place in popular culture. [3] (HCA)
HART 2780. History of Western Urbanism. [Formerly HART 270] Urban form and planning from antiquity to the present. The integration of
architecture and landscape. Diachronic surveys. Case studies, including
Nashville. [3] (P)
HART 2782. Storied Places: History of Landscape Design. [Formerly
HART 271] Landscape architecture as art form in Europe, Western Asia,
and North America, from antiquity to the present. Stewardship and manipulation of land and water. Design of gardens and green spaces. Social
and political meanings and messages. [3] (HCA)
HART 3112. The Arts of China during the Liao-Song Period. [Formerly HART 249] Art and architecture of China during the Liao-Song period
from C.E. 907 to C.E. 1279. Political, religious, and aesthetic contexts.
Influence of coastal trade and pilgrimage in transformations of painting,
sculpture, ceramics, and architecture. [3] (INT)
HART 3140. Healing and Art in East Asia. Influence of early healing
practices on the development of the arts of East Asia. Magical healing
texts, talismans, and tattoos; diagramming the body and the landscape;
and the art of the Buddha of Medicine. Gardens and growing transformative herbs. Tea as medicine and art. No credit for students who have
earned credit for HONS 1820W-28. [3] (HCA)
HART 3164W. Art of Buddhist Relic and Reliquary. [Formerly HART
245W] From second century BCE to present. Relic veneration and construction of reliquaries from a visual perspective. Beautification, ritualization, use and abuse, and bodily issues spanning India, China, Korea, Japan, and Southeast Asia. [3] (INT)
HART 3172. Himalayan Art: Art of the Divine Abode. [Formerly HART
247] Art of Nepal and Tibet from its inception to the present. Religious
and cultural contexts. Initial western responses; Hindu and Buddhist art
and architecture in Nepal; Tibetan Buddhist Art; artistic productions in the
Tibetan diaspora; and souvenir art in Nepal. [3] (INT)
HART 3174. The South Asian Temple. [Formerly HART 248] From its
inception to the present. Morphological and stylistic analysis. Anthropological and ethnographical approach to temples as living communal entities. [3] (INT)
HART 3224. Greek Sculpture. [Formerly HART 264] Style, materials,
and techniques ca. 900-31 B.C. Sculptors’ craft and their reasons for the

A&S

184
creation of both free-standing and architectural sculpture. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed CLAS 216. [3] (HCA)
HART 3226. Greek Vases and Society. [Formerly HART 265] Ancient
Greek vases as social documents. Interdisciplinary approaches, including
historiographic, stylistic, semiotic, contextual, and scientific. Production,
trade, and the functions of vases in funerary and ritual contexts, particularly the symposium. The development of black- and red-figure vase painting and iconography. [3] (HCA)
HART 3228W. Gender and Sexuality in Greek Art. [Formerly HART
262W] Iconography of vase-painting and sculpture, from the Archaic
through the Hellenistic periods. Visual constructions of bodies, poses,
gestures, and dress, reflecting cultural attitudes towards courtship, marriage, rape, prostitution, and homosexuality. Emphasis on methodological
approaches and comparisons with modern societies. Offered on a graded
basis only. [3] (HCA)
HART 3240W. Ancient Landscapes. [Formerly HART 260W] Greco-Roman attitudes toward nature. Exploitation and stewardship of resources.
Country-house and garden design. Representations of mythological and
sacred landscapes in painting and poetry. [3] (HCA)
HART 3252. Cities of the Roman East. [Formerly HART 266] Provincial centers, sanctuaries, and monuments from Greece to Arabia. Major
centers and case studies of public and private commissions. Architectural
reflections of Romanization and resistance; local and imperial patronage;
patrimony and memory; borderland architecture. [3] (HCA)
HART 3272. Portraits in Late Antiquity. [Formerly HART 206] Social,
political, and religious functions of portraits from the first century through
the sixth century CE. Issues of representation, including the construction
of identity, social status, mediation of presence through image, and what
constitutes a likeness. Portraits as memorials, as objects of veneration,
and idealized models. Influences on later portraiture. [3] (HCA)
HART 3274. Art and Empire from Constantine to Justinian. [Formerly
HART 208] An interdisciplinary study of Roman social, political, religious,
and art historical developments in the fourth through sixth centuries CE.
[3] (HCA)
HART 3320. Early Renaissance Florence. [Formerly HART 217] Painting and sculpture in fifteenth-century Florence. Ghiberti, Donatello, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, and Botticelli. Stylistic progression; iconographic interpretation and meaning; the role of patronage and audience; and original
physical and cultural context. The Italian Renaissance workshop. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 2310. Repeat credit for students
who have earned credit for 3320W. [3] (HCA)
HART 3320W. Early Renaissance Florence. [Formerly HART 217W]
Painting and sculpture in fifteenth-century Florence. Ghiberti, Donatello,
Masaccio, Fra Angelico, and Botticelli. Stylistic progression, iconographic
interpretation and meaning, the role of patronage and audience, original
physical and cultural context, and the Italian Renaissance workshop. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 2310. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3320.
[3] (HCA)
HART 3332. Raphael and the Renaissance. [Formerly HART 216] Art
in Central Italy, ca. 1400-1520, with a focus on Rafaello Sanzio. His origin
and artistic formation in Urbino and Perugia, early commissions in Florence, mature works and legacy in Rome. Predecessors Masaccio, Donatello, Piero della Francesca, and Pietro Perugino. Contemporaries Leonardo and Michelangelo. Taught on location in Italy. [3] (INT)
HART 3334. Michelangelo’s Life and Works. [Formerly HART 220]
Sculpture, painting, architecture, and graphic works. Poetry and letters.
Cultural, historical, religious, and political climate of his day. Influence upon
artists. Critical reception. Repeat credit for students who have completed
3334W. [3] (HCA)
HART 3334W. Michelangelo’s Life and Works. [Formerly HART 220W]
Sculpture, painting, architecture, and graphic works. Poetry and letters.
Cultural, historical, religious, and political climate of his day. Influence upon
artists. Critical reception. Repeat credit for students who have completed
3334. [3] (HCA)

vanderbilt university
HART 3364W. The Court of Burgundy. [Formerly HART 213W] The visual arts of the Dukes of Burgundy (1363-1477) in cultural context. Portraiture, chivalry, costume, storytelling, and ceremony. Artists include Claus
Sluter, Jan van Eyck, and Rogier van der Weyden. [3] (HCA)
HART 3605W. French Art in the Age of Louis XV: From Rococo to
Neoclassicism. Court art and visual culture 1715 to 1775. Aesthetic development in painting, sculpture, interior design, and architecture. Watteau, Boucher, Fragonard, Falconet, Boffrand. Chinoiserie and exoticisms,
porcelain industry at Sèvres, and domestication of royal spaces at Versailles. Women patrons such as Mme de Pompadour and Mme du Barry.
Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)
HART 3718W. Twentieth-Century Mexican Art: Painting, Cinema,
Literature. [Formerly HART 236W] From muralism to performance art.
Relationship between artistic style and historical context. Analysis of ideological content. Rivera, Orozco, Kahlo, Modotti, Paz. Offered on a graded
basis only. [3] (HCA)
HART 3725W. The Skyscraper: Modern Urban Icon. Development of
the architectural type from the late 19th to the mid-20th century, seen
from stylistic, technological, urban, artistic, and economic perspectives.
[3] (HCA)
HART 3730. Twentieth-Century Sculpture. [Formerly HART 234] Definitions, materials, movements, theories, and related practices, including
architecture. [3] (HCA)
HART 3735. History of Photography. [Formerly HART 233] Uses and
meanings of photography from its invention (c. 1839) to the present. Ways
of thinking about the medium and its status as a separate discipline in relation to the history of art. [3] (HCA)
HART 3740. History of Sound Art. [Formerly HART 243] From twentieth
century to present. Use of sound as artistic medium. Experimental practices; the relationship of art and technology; sound art’s position between
music, performance and installation art. Cage, Cardiff, Paik, Rosenfeld,
and Trimpin. [3] (HCA)
HART 3767W. Neo-Dada and Pop Art. Artistic movements at the end
of modernism and beginning of postmodernism, 1955-1980. Intersection
with music, consumer culture, advertising, and economics. Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Andy Warhol, and Roy Lichtenstein. Issues of gender and sexuality through construction of femininity
and masculinity. [3] (US)
HART 3790. Monumental Landscapes of Provence. First millennium
BCE to the present. Architecture and art, physical geography and natural
resources in Mediterranean France. Greek-Gallic interactions, Roman urbanism, medieval institutions, and modern painting and design. Based in
Aix-en-Provence and Marseille. [3] [HCA]
HART 3810W. Exhibiting Historical Art. [Formerly HART 280W] Research and exhibition of art in the permanent collection of the Vanderbilt
University Fine Arts Gallery. Research methods and principles of object
organization and display, illustrated via selected objects that vary annually.
[3] (HCA)
HART 3840. Directed Study. [Formerly HART 290] Registration only with
agreement of instructor involved and with written approval of the director
of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HART 3840] (No AXLE credit)
HART 3850. Independent Research. [Formerly HART 289] Supervised
work in extension of regular offerings in the curriculum. Registration only
with agreement of instructor involved and with written approval of the director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits,
but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment.
[1-3] (No AXLE credit)
HART 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly HART 293B] Students gain
experience in a broad range of arts-related programs, at public or private institutions, including museums, and/or federal agencies. Students
may take 1-3 hours in 3883, which includes background research, done
concurrently with a one-semester internship program (3880), leading to
submission of a research paper at the end of that semester. A 3.0 grade

College of Arts and Science / Courses

185

point average, approval of a specific plan by the department, and at least
6 hours of prior work in History of Art is required. Offered only on a pass/
fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3883. Will not count as
part of the minimum hours for the History of Art major or minor. Corequisite: 3883. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit).

HONS 1860W. College Honors Seminar in International Cultures.
[Formerly HONS 186] Offered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for
credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may
earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (INT)

HART 3883. Internship Research. [Formerly HART 293A] Students gain
experience in a broad range of arts-related programs, at public or private institutions, including museums, and/or federal agencies. Students
may take 1-3 hours in 3883, which includes background research, done
concurrently with a one-semester internship program (3880), leading to
submission of a research paper at the end of that semester. A 3.0 grade
point average, approval of a specific plan by the department, and at least 6
hours of prior work in History of Art is required. Readings and critiqued assignments under faculty supervision. Will not count as part of the minimum
hours for the History of Art major or minor. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable
credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit).

Humanities

HART 3890. Selected Topics. [Formerly HART 288] May be repeated for
credit twice if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 9 credits
total for all semesters of HART 3890] (No AXLE credit)
HART 4960. Advanced Seminar. [Formerly HART 295] An undergraduate seminar involving advanced In-depth reading, research, and writing in
a particular area of art history. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference to majors. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in
topic and not twice from the same instructor. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course each semester. Offered on a graded basis
only. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 295; maximum of
9 credits for HART Honors candidates] (HCA)
HART 4998. Honors Research. [Formerly HART 298] Research to be
done in consultation with a member of the faculty in history of art. Open
only to those beginning honors work in history of art. May be repeated for
a total of 6 credits. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of
HART 4998] (No AXLE credit)
HART 4999. Honors Thesis. [Formerly HART 299] Open only to seniors
in the departmental honors program. Students completing this course
with distinction, including a thesis and final examination, will earn honors
in history of art. Prerequisite: 4998. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HART 4999] (No
AXLE credit)

HUM 1610. Selected Topics. [Formerly HUM 161] Topics Vary. May be
repeated more than once if there is no duplication of topic. [3] (No AXLE
credit)

Interdisciplinary Studies
INDS 3831. Global Citizenship and Service. [Formerly INDS 270A]
This course is offered by the Vanderbilt Initiative for Scholarship and Engagement (VISAGE). Graduate students may take this course for graduate
credit. A service-learning course introducing students to themes and interpretations of global citizenship. Intended to be followed by 3832. [3] (INT)
INDS 3832. Global Community Service. [Formerly INDS 270B] This
course is offered by the Vanderbilt Initiative for Scholarship and Engagement (VISAGE). Graduate students may take this course for graduate
credit. Students will design and conduct research projects in collaboration
with faculty mentors. Prerequisite: 3831. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
INDS 3833. Seminar in Global Citizenship and Service. [Formerly
INDS 270C] This course is offered by the Vanderbilt Initiative for Scholarship and Engagement (VISAGE). Graduate students may take this course
for graduate credit. Project- and research-based seminar drawing on student experiences and learning in 3831 and 3832. Prerequisite: 3832. [3]
(INT)
INDS 3880. Interdisciplinary Internship. [Formerly INDS 280A, 280B,
280C] Internship credit for work approved by the designated Associate
Dean of Arts and Science. A written scholarly project must be produced in
the internship. Must be taken P/F. Repeatable twice for a maximum of 3
credit hours in 3880 (and 3884) combined. [1] (No AXLE credit)
INDS 3884. Interdisciplinary Internship. [Formerly INDS 280D] Internship credit for summer work approved by the designated Associate Dean
of Arts and Science. A written scholarly project must be produced in the
internship. Course must be taken P/F. May be repeated for credit; maximum of 3 credit hours in 3881, 3882, 3883, and 3884 combined. [1] (No
AXLE credit)

Honors
HONS 1810W. College Honors Seminar in the Humanities and Creative Arts. [Formerly HONS 181] Offered on a graded basis only. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment.
[3] (HCA)
HONS 1820W. College Perspectives Honors Seminar. [Formerly
HONS 182] Offered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit
more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn
only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (P)
HONS 1830W. College Honors Seminar in Behavioral and Social
Sciences. [Formerly HONS 183] Offered on a graded basis only. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment.
[3] (SBS)
HONS 1840W. College Honors Seminar in History and Culture of
the United States. [Formerly HONS 184] Offered on a graded basis only.
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in
topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (US)
HONS 1850W. College Honors Seminar in Mathematics and Natural
Science. [Formerly HONS 185] Offered on a graded basis only. May be
repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but
students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3]
(MNS)

Italian
ITA 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly ITA 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
ITA 1101. Elementary Italian. [Formerly ITA 101A] Introduction to reading, writing, and speaking through an exploration of Italian culture. For
students who have studied little or no Italian. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Italian language course. [3] (No
AXLE credit)
ITA 1102. Elementary Italian. [Formerly ITA 101B] Study of the language
through an exploration of Italian culture. No credit for students who have
earned credit for a more advanced Italian language course. Prerequisite:
1101. [3] (INT)
ITA 1103. Intensive Elementary Italian. [Formerly ITA 102] One-semester intensive course for students who have some knowledge of Italian or of
another romance language. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 1101, 1102, or a more advanced Italian language course. [3] (INT)
ITA 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly ITA 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

A&S

186
ITA 2203. Italian Journeys. [Formerly ITA 200] Life and art in the diverse
regions of Italy through an integrated four-skills approach of reading, writing, listening and speaking. No credit for students who have earned credit
for a more advanced Italian language course. Prerequisite: 1102 or 1103.
[3] (INT)
ITA 2501W. Grammar and Composition. [Formerly ITA 201W] Syntax,
idiomatic expressions, and current usage. No credit for students who have
earned credit for a more advanced Italian language course. Prerequisite:
2203. [3] (INT)
ITA 2614. Conversation. [Formerly ITA 214] Development of oral proficiency through analysis and discussion of films, magazine articles, and
contemporary art and literature. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (INT)
ITA 3000. Introduction to Italian Literature. [Formerly ITA 220] Critical
reading of major works of Italian literature from the beginning to the present. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
ITA 3041. Italian Civilization. [Formerly ITA 230] The politics, intellectual,
social, artistic, and economic history of Italy from 1300 to the present, with
emphasis on major political and philosophical authors. Taught in English.
[3] (INT)
ITA 3100. Literature from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance. [Formerly ITA 232] The ideas and forms of the Trecento, Quattrocento, and
Cinquecento, as reflected in the philosophy, history, literature, and art history of these periods. Major writers and their influence on Western European literatures. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)
ITA 3240. Dante’s Divine Comedy. [Formerly ITA 231] Dante’s language and philosophical tenets through the study of style, characters, and
themes. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)
ITA 3242. Dante in Historical Context. [Formerly ITA 288] Dante’s philosophical and critical works in their medieval historical context and his
influence in building a modern Western civilization. Knowledge of Italian
not required. [3] (HCA)

vanderbilt university
ITA 3702. Topics in Contemporary Italian Civilization. [Formerly ITA
239] Short stories, historical documents, and articles from the press. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (No AXLE credit)
ITA 3740. Gangsters, Lovers, Madonnas, and Mistresses. [Formerly
ITA 236] The history of Italian immigration in the United States. American
representations of Italians and Italian-Americans from 1900 to the present. Cinematographic and literary images of Italians and Italian Americans.
Historical and anthropological scholarship. Films, fiction, ethnic marketing,
and travel writing. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (US)
ITA 3802. Contemporary Italian Society and Culture. [Formerly ITA
242] Capitalism and modernization, immigration, and multiculturalism.
Racism, youth culture, gender, sexuality, and feminism. Changing definitions of family. Regionalism, entertainment, and sport. Prerequisite: 2203.
[3] (P)
ITA 3803. Mediterranean Culture (taught in Sicily and Italy). [Formerly ITA 243] Culture and history of the Mediterranean. Taught in Sicily
and the Italian peninsula. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (HCA)
ITA 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly ITA 289] A reading course, the
content of which varies according to the needs of the individual student.
Primarily designed to cover pertinent material not otherwise available in the
regular curriculum. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits over a foursemester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester
of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of ITA
3850] (No AXLE credit)
ITA 3890. Special Topics in Italian Literature. [Formerly ITA 294A] May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.
Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Japanese

ITA 3340. Famous Women by Boccaccio. [Formerly ITA 250] Boccaccio’s Famous Women, the first collection of female biographies. Evolution
of the literary representation of women from classical times to the Renaissance. Contemporary criticism and theory. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

JAPN 1011. Basic Japanese I. [Formerly JAPN 200A] Simple conversation, writing system, and reading. Designed exclusively for students
with little or no previous exposure to Japanese. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Japanese language
course. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ITA 3500. Baroque, Illuminismo, and Romanticism in Italy. [Formerly
ITA 233] Literature of the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries, with
particular reference to the influence of European literatures in Italy. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

JAPN 1012. Basic Japanese II. [Formerly JAPN 200B] No credit for
students who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Japanese
language course. Prerequisite: 1011. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ITA 3600. Twentieth-Century Literature: Beauty and Chaos. [Formerly ITA 235] Poetry and prose in social and historical context. Prerequisite:
2501W. [3] (HCA)
ITA 3640. Classic Italian Cinema. [Formerly ITA 240] From the 1910s
to the 1970s. Selected works from Neorealism to Art Film. Relationship
between cinema and the other arts. Contrasting film styles, including abstraction and realism, and tradition and transgression. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (INT)
ITA 3641. Contemporary Italian Cinema. [Formerly ITA 241] From the
1970s to the present. Postmodern forays into metafiction, parody, and
political and social critique. The return to realism and New Regionalism
in the twenty-first century. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (HCA)
ITA 3642. Italian Visual Culture. [Formerly ITA 280] Parallels between
Italian literature and the visual arts, including painting, cinema, and intermediality. Focus on the representation of the visual arts in literature,
the representation of literature in the visual arts, and Italy as the cradle of
Western visual culture. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (HCA)
ITA 3701. City Fictions. [Formerly ITA 238] Interdisciplinary exploration of
how Italian authors, directors, and artists aspire to change the way readers
and viewers understand and experience urban realities. Social, cultural,
geographical, and architectural aspects of Italian cities as depicted in fiction, travel literature, cinematic images, the visual arts, and music. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (P)

JAPN 1101. Elementary Japanese I. [Formerly JAPN 201] Acquisition
of oral-aural skills and basic grammar. Introduction to reading and writing
Japanese syllabaries and Chinese characters. Two hours of lecture and
three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 1012 or a more advanced Japanese language course. [5] (No
AXLE credit)
JAPN 1102. Elementary Japanese II. [Formerly JAPN 202] Two hours
of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Prerequisite: 1012 or 1101. [5] (INT)
JAPN 2201. Intermediate Japanese I. [Formerly JAPN 211] Development of conversational skills and linguistic competence. Syntax, writing,
and reading. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No
credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese
language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [5] (INT)
JAPN 2202. Intermediate Japanese II. [Formerly JAPN 212] Two hours
of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [5] (INT)
JAPN 2232. Japanese through Manga. [Formerly JAPN 232] Reading
and analysis of Japanese comic books. Language skills and knowledge
of contemporary Japanese popular culture. Basic knowledge of hiragana
and katakana required. [1] (No AXLE credit)
JAPN 3301. Advanced Japanese I. [Formerly JAPN 241] Reading and
writing in contemporary Japanese texts. Conversation, discussion, and

College of Arts and Science / Courses
development of pragmatic competence. No credit for students who have
earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)
JAPN 3302. Advanced Japanese II. [Formerly JAPN 242] No credit for
students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language
course. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT)
JAPN 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly JAPN 289A] A reading
course which may be repeated with variable content according to the
needs of the individual student. Primarily designed to cover materials not
otherwise available in the regular curriculum. May be repeated for a total
of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [13; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of JAPN 3851 and 3852]
(No AXLE credit)
JAPN 3852. Independent Study. [Formerly JAPN 289B] A reading
course which may be repeated with variable content according to the
needs of the individual student. Primarily designed to cover materials not
otherwise available in the regular curriculum. May be repeated for a total
of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [13; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of JAPN 3851 and 3852]
(No AXLE credit)
JAPN 3891. Special Topics in Advanced Japanese. [Formerly JAPN
251] Reading, writing, and discussion in authentic Japanese cultural, literary, and historical texts. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3302. [3] (INT)

Jewish Studies
JS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly JS 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
JS 1002. Introduction to Jewish Studies. [Formerly JS 180] Introduction to Judaism and Jewish history through philosophical, political, social, psychological, and artistic perspectives. Biblical studies; and culture,
philosophy, and literature. Antiquity and the medieval world; modern and
contemporary experience. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002W. [3] (INT)
JS 1002W. Introduction to Jewish Studies. [Formerly JS 180W] Introduction to Judaism and Jewish history through philosophical, political,
social, psychological, and artistic perspectives. Biblical studies; culture,
philosophy, and literature. Antiquity and the medieval world; modern and
contemporary experience. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002. [3] (INT)
JS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly JS 115F] Independent
learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
JS 1200. Classical Judaism: Jews in Antiquity. [Formerly JS 122] History of the Jewish people from biblical origins through the 2nd century CE.
The Hellenistic Age, the Age of the Maccabees, Roman rule, and the rise
of the Rabbis and Rabbinic literature. [3] (HCA)
JS 1220. Jews in the Medieval World. [Formerly JS 123] Jewish experience from the 2nd century CE to 1492. Legal status of Jews; economic
and religious developments. Burning the Talmud, age of charters, reaction
to the Crusades, Jewish expulsion from Spain. [3] (INT)
JS 1240. Perspectives in Modern Jewish History. [Formerly JS 124]
Meaning and origins of modern Jewish history from 1492. The diverse experiences of Jewish communities across the globe. Men’s and women’s
redefinition of Jewish identity as they confronted modernity. Rise of secular rights for Jews but also of new forms of persecution. [3] (P)

187
JS 2100. The New Testament in Its Jewish Contexts. [Formerly JS
219] Documents of the origin of Christianity and the social, literary, ideological, and theological contexts in which they emerged and which they reflect. Various critical methodologies employed in interpreting them. [3] (P)
JS 2150. Issues in Rabbinic Literature. [Formerly JS 233] History of
Rabbinic thought from its origins to the Middle Ages through the reading
of central Rabbinic texts. Capital punishment, women in Rabbinic culture,
sectarianism, and the power structures of Roman Palestine and Sasanian
Babylonia. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester
of enrollment. [3] (INT)
JS 2210W. Hebrew Literature in Translation. [Formerly JS 235W] Origins and development in Eastern Europe from the nineteenth century to
postmodern Israeli literature. The relationship between historical transformations and literary form. [3] (INT)
JS 2215. Modern Yiddish Literature in Translation. Late nineteenth to
mid-twentieth century. Diaspora, minority writing, gender, from shtetl to
city, and the Holocaust. [3] (INT)
JS 2220. Israeli Culture through Film. Cinematic representations of
modern Israeli culture. Historical, social, and political aspects. Constructions of national identity. Treatments of war and conflict, ethnicity, gender,
and Zionism. [3] (INT)
JS 2230W. American Southern Jews in Life and Literature. [Formerly
JS 162W] From colonial times to the present. Interactions between Southern Jews and other Southerners, and between Southern and Northern
Jews. The Civil War, Jewish economic activities, and the civil rights movement. [3] (US)
JS 2240W. Black-Jewish Relations in Post-War American Literature and Culture. [Formerly JS 137W] The historical relationship between
African Americans and Jewish Americans and its portrayal in novels, short
stories, and films by artists from both communities. [3] (US)
JS 2250W. Witnesses Who Were Not There: Literature of the Children of Holocaust Survivors. [Formerly JS 253W] Fiction and non-fiction produced by children of Holocaust survivors. [3] (HCA)
JS 2260. Coming of Age in Jewish Literature and Film. [Formerly JS
237] The transition of young Jewish protagonists into adulthood as portrayed in literary works and films from Europe, Africa, and the Americas.
Repeat credit for students who have completed 2260W. [3] (INT)
JS 2260W. Coming of Age in Jewish Literature and Film. [Formerly
JS 237W] The transition of young Jewish protagonists into adulthood as
portrayed in literary works and films from Europe, Africa, and the Americas. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2260. [3] (INT)
JS 2270. Jewish Storytelling. [Formerly JS 248] Twentieth-century short
fiction and narrative traditions. The transition from religious to secular cultural forms. Immigration and ethnic literary forms. All works are in English
or English translation from Yiddish, Hebrew, and Russian. Repeat credit
for students who have completed 2270W. [3] (HCA)
JS 2270W. Jewish Storytelling. [Formerly JS 248W] Twentieth-century
short fiction and narrative traditions. The transition from religious to secular cultural forms. Immigration and ethnic literary forms. All works are in
English or English translation from Yiddish, Hebrew, and Russian. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 2270. [3] (HCA)
JS 2280. Jewish Humor. [Formerly JS 138] The flowering of Jewish humor, especially in the U.S. during the twentieth century. Vaudeville, radio
comedy, and the Golden Age of television. The careers and works of influential comics, writers and filmmakers, and the development of standup comedy. The effect of Talmudic disputes, Yiddish wordplay, and the
history of Diaspora life upon secular Jewish comedians, essayists, playwrights, and fiction writers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2280W. [3] (US)
JS 2280W. Jewish Humor. [Formerly JS 138W] The flowering of Jewish
humor, especially in the U.S. during the twentieth century. Vaudeville, radio
comedy, and the Golden Age of television. The careers and works of influential comics, writers and filmmakers, and the development of stand-up

A&S

188

vanderbilt university

comedy. The effect of Talmudic disputes, Yiddish wordplay, and the history
of Diaspora life upon secular Jewish comedians, essayists, playwrights, and
fiction writers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2280. [3]
(US)

phantine, Alexander the Great, the Maccabees, the Septuagint, Aristeas,
Josephus, Philo, the rabbis, the New Testament, Ezekiel the Tragedian,
Byzantium. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 257 section 1 in fall 2010. [3] (INT)

JS 2290W. Imagining the Alien: Jewish Science Fiction. [Formerly JS
136W] Science fiction and speculative fiction by Jewish writers in cultural
context. Aliens, robots, and secret identities; time travel; utopia and political critique; questions of Jewish identity. [3] (HCA)

JS 3000. Major Themes in Jewish Studies. [Formerly JS 245] The
study of Jews, Judaism, and Jewish culture. History of Jewish Studies,
core perspectives, key methodologies, critical debates. Classical literature, current trends. [3] (P)

JS 2300. Modern Jewish Thought. [Formerly JS 240] Jewish intellectual
responses to major transformations of modernity. Impact of secularization, universalism, pluralism, nationalism, and gender theories on Jewish
thought and identity. Conflicting perspectives of tradition, education, culture, and religion. Relationship between Israel and the diaspora. [3] (P)

JS 3100. The Holocaust. [Formerly JS 156] The history of the Holocaust:
its origins, development, and its legacy in the context of Germany and
European history. [3] (INT)

JS 2320. Freud and Jewish Identity. [Formerly JS 244] Analysis of
rhetoric and themes in selected writings of Sigmund Freud and his times,
development of assimilation and of anti-Semitic repudiation. [3] (SBS)
JS 2330. Is G-d Guilty? The Problem of Evil in Judaism. [Formerly JS
250] Origin, nature, and representations of evil from Scripture through the
Hasidic masters. Reflections of modern thinkers. [3] (HCA)
JS 2340. Jewish Philosophy after Auschwitz. [Formerly JS 249] Critical responses to social and political institutions and the corresponding
modes of thought that made Auschwitz possible and continue to sustain
the barbarism that many leading philosophers have identified at the heart
of culture. [3] (INT)
JS 2400. American Jewish Life. [Formerly JS 155] Diversity, individualism, and change in Jewish life. Food and culture, memory and identity,
gender and assimilation, Reform-Conservative-Orthodox culture wars. [3]
(SBS)
JS 2420W. American Jewish Songwriters. [Formerly JS 139W] From
the late 19th Century to the present. Vaudeville, Tin Pan Alley, the development of the stage musical, and the Brill Building. Folk, rock, pop, and
country. Contributions of Jewish songwriters to American music. [3] (US)
JS 2450. The Jewish Diaspora. [Formerly JS 158] Changing Jewish
communities, especially outside the United States and Israel, in macrohistorical context. Post-communist European Jewish identity. New global
diasporas and their relationship to the largest Jewish communities in Israel
and the United States. [3] (INT)
JS 2500. Modern Israel. [Formerly JS 125] Internal dynamics, debates,
and conflicts within Israeli society. Political, social, and cultural transformations from the 1980s to the present. [3] (INT)
JS 2520. Zionism: Politics, Religion, and Ethnicity. [Formerly JS 255]
Tensions among religion, nationalism, and political activism. Translations
of Messianism into a secular program. Criticism from within and without
the movement. [3] (HCA)
JS 2540. Power and Diplomacy in the Modern Middle East. [Formerly
JS 256] History of the Middle East in the 19th and 20th centuries with an
emphasis on U.S. involvement after 1945. U.S. relationship with Israel, and
its impact on the region. [3] (INT)
JS 2560. Social Movements in Modern Jewish Life. [Formerly JS 252]
How social movements shape contemporary American Jewish culture and
politics. Explores movements internal to Judaism and those bringing religion into the public sphere. [3] (SBS)
JS 2600. Islam and the Jews. [Formerly JS 120] Muslim-Jewish relations from the beginning of Islam to the present. Mohammed and the
Jews, Jewish roles in Islamic cultures, status of Muslims in contemporary
Israel, recent Jewish exodus from Muslim lands. [3] (INT)
JS 2620. Jews in Egypt. [Formerly JS 222] Jewish life and experience
under Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Muslim rule in Egypt from the Ptolemies to 1956. Jewish self-government, economic life, and culture over
twenty-two centuries, through letters, documents, and imaginative literature. [3] (INT)
JS 2640. Jews and Greeks. [Formerly JS 230] From the seventh century
BCE to ca. 1500 CE. Sites of interaction, languages, cultural ties, religious
tensions, political conflicts, and competing philosophies. Works by Ele-

JS 3210. Reading Across Boundaries: Jewish and Non-Jewish
Texts. [Formerly JS 234] Jewish and non-Jewish literary and historical
texts studied in parallel so as to discover the differences between them.
The course will consider texts from the ancient world to the early modern
period and ask what constitutes Jewish writing and how it has been defined through time and geography. All readings will be in English. [3] (INT)
JS 3830. Contemporary Jewish Issues. [Formerly JS 280] Projects will
vary according to the instructor. Service to community will be integral part
of course. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 3840. Directed Readings. [Formerly JS 290] Advanced readings and
research on a selected topic done under the supervision of a faculty mentor. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly JS 289] A research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty mentor. May be repeated for a
total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn
only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of JS 3850] (No AXLE credit)
JS 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly JS 288A] Under faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as
community, municipal, or government agencies. A thorough report and
research paper are required. Must be taken on a Pass/Fail basis only and
must be taken concurrently with 3883. Corequisite: 3883. [Variable credit:
1-3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 3883. Internship Research. [Formerly JS 288B] Under faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as
community, municipal, or government agencies. A thorough report and
research paper are required. Students will write a research paper drawing
on their experiences in 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly JS 284] Topics as announced. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.
Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 3892. Topics in Ancient and Medieval Jewish History. [Formerly
JS 257] From antiquity to 1492. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit
more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 3894. Topics in Modern Jewish History. [Formerly JS 258] From
1492 to the present. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 4301. Jewish Language and Paleography. [Formerly JS 238] Advanced study in a language of the Jewish people with a particular focus
on the linguistic and paleographic features that define its cultural context.
Each section focuses on one of the following languages: Aramaic, Ladino,
Judaeo-Arabic, Rabbinic Hebrew, or Yiddish. May be repeated for credit
up to two times when the language studied differs. Consent of instructor
required. [3] (INT)
JS 4960. Senior Seminar. [Formerly JS 295] Advanced reading and research in a particular area of Jewish studies. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 4970. Senior Project in Jewish Studies. [Formerly JS 296] Readings and independent research. Prerequisite: senior standing. [3] (No
AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
JS 4980. Senior Honors Research Seminar. [Formerly JS 298A] Presentation and discussion of progress being made on honors theses. Open
only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)
JS 4981. Senior Honors Research Seminar. [Formerly JS 298B] Presentation and discussion of progress being made on honors theses. Open
only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)

K’iche’
KICH 1101. Elementary K’iche’ I. Kaqchikel, K’iche’, or Q’eqchi’. Basic speaking, reading, and writing skills. Offered on a graded basis only.
Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for ANTH
2612. [3] (No AXLE credit)
KICH 1102. Elementary K’iche’ II. Intermediate level course with advanced grammar. Counterfactual constructions, deixis, verbal derivations
of positional roots, sound symbolic verbs, and verbal nominalizations. Vocabulary and idioms. Various literary genres. No credit for students who
have earned credit for ANTH 2614. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101 or ANTH 2612. [3] (INT)
KICH 2201. Intermediate K’iche’ I. Vocabulary, listening, and speaking
skills. Modern and colonial texts. Cultural context of linguistic practices in
K’iche’ communities. No credit for students who have earned credit for
Anthropology 278. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1102.
[3] (INT)
KICH 2202. Intermediate K’iche’ II. Taught in K’iche’. Advanced vocabulary, grammar, syntax, reading, and writing. Colonial and modern
texts. No credit for students who have earned credit for ANTH 3615. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201 or ANTH 3614. [3] (INT)

Latin
LAT 1101. Beginning Latin I. [Formerly LAT 101] Practice in speaking
and writing. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced Latin language course. Graded basis only. [3] (No AXLE credit)
LAT 1102. Beginning Latin II. [Formerly LAT 102] Transition to literary
Latin. Emphasis on comprehension of texts. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Latin language course. Graded
basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)
LAT 1103. Intensive Elementary Latin. [Formerly LAT 100] The equivalent of Latin 1101 and 1102. This course presents the elements of the
Latin language at an accelerated pace. Designed for students who have
completed one or two years of Latin in high school but are not prepared to
enter Latin 1102. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101,
1102, or a more advanced Latin language course. [5] (INT)
LAT 2201. Intermediate Latin: Prose. [Formerly LAT 103] Review of
Latin grammar and selected reading from major Latin authors. No credit
for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Latin language
course except 2202. [3] (INT)
LAT 2202. Intermediate Latin: Poetry. [Formerly LAT 104] Selected
reading from the major Latin poets. No credit for students who have
earned credit for a more advanced Latin language course. [3] (INT)
LAT 3010. The Writings of Caesar. [Formerly LAT 218] Selections from
The Civil War and The Gallic War. Literary style and historical context.
Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3020. Cicero and the Humanistic Tradition. [Formerly LAT 206]
Study of Cicero’s career and thought, and of his contribution to the development of the concept of humanitas. Readings from his letters, speeches,
or philosophical works. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3030. Latin Letters. [Formerly LAT 205] The literary letters of Seneca and Pliny, with a brief introduction to the personal correspondence
of Cicero and the letters discovered at Vindolanda. Prerequisite: 2202.
[3] (HCA)

189
LAT 3040. The Roman Historians. [Formerly LAT 215] Selections from
Sallust, Livy, and Tacitus, with attention to their objectives and methods;
analysis of Roman historiography and its relation to Greek and early Christian historiography. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3050. Suetonius. [Formerly LAT 217] Selections from the works of
one of Rome’s most important biographers, read in the context of the
Latin biographical tradition as well as the political and social background.
Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3060. Tacitus. [Formerly LAT 216] Selections from the works of one
of Rome’s most important historians, read in the context of historiographical tradition and political and social background. Prerequisite: 2202. [3]
(HCA)
LAT 3100. Roman Comedy. [Formerly LAT 212] Reading of selected
comedies of Plautus and Terence: study of the form of Roman comedy
and its relation to the Greek New Comedy. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3110. Catullus. [Formerly LAT 201] Reading and interpretation of
Catullus’ poems; aesthetic, political, and rhetorical contexts; fundamentals
of Latin meter. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3120. Lucretius: De Rerum Natura. [Formerly LAT 268] Lucretius’
poem studied both in the tradition of Epicurean philosophy and as a landmark in the development of the Latin didactic epic; background material
in the fragments of Epicurus and some treatment of the Epicurean movement in Italy and especially in Rome. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3130. Vergil: The Aeneid. [Formerly LAT 220] An intensive study of
the entire poem, in the context of the epic tradition. Prerequisite: 2202.
[3] (HCA)
LAT 3140. The Lyric Poetry of Horace. [Formerly LAT 203] Reading and
interpretation of Horace’s Epodes and Odes; relation to the Greco-Roman
lyric tradition and to Augustan politics. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3150. Latin Elegy. [Formerly LAT 204] Authors who created a new
type of love poetry during the rule of emperor Augustus: Tibullus, Propertius, Ovid, and Sulpicia. Construction and contestation of gender roles;
political contexts; development of the elegiac couplet; modern responses.
Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3160. Ovid. [Formerly LAT 202] Reading and interpretation of selections from the Metamorphoses or other works of Ovid. Prerequisite: 2202.
[3] (HCA)
LAT 3170. Roman Satire. [Formerly LAT 264] The satires of Horace and
Juvenal; the origins of Roman satire; history and conventions of the genre;
background reading in other Roman satirists. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3180. Neronian Writers. [Formerly LAT 267] Selections from authors in the literary renaissance during the reign of the artistic Emperor
Nero, including Seneca, Lucan, Persius, and Petronius. Stylistic innovations, literary merits, and cultural contexts. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3200. Early Christian Writers. [Formerly LAT 260] Selections from
the writings of Latin Christians, from the account of Perpetua’s martyrdom
to the Confessions of Augustine. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)
LAT 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly LAT 289] Designed for majors
wanting to familiarize themselves with works or authors not covered in the
regular curriculum. Prerequisite: 6 hours above 2202. May be repeated for
a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn
only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of LAT 3850] (No AXLE credit)
LAT 3890. Special Topics in Latin Literature. [Formerly LAT 294] May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.
Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[3] (HCA)

A&S

190

Latin American Studies
LAS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly LAS 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit.)
LAS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly LAS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
LAS 2101. Introduction to Latin America. [Formerly LAS 201] A multidisciplinary survey of Latin America from pre-Columbian times to the present emphasizing culture, economic and political patterns, social issues,
literature, and the arts in a historical perspective. [3] (INT)
LAS 2102. Introduction to Brazil. [Formerly LAS 202] A multidisciplinary
survey of Brazil from pre-Columbian times to the present, emphasizing
culture, economic and political patterns, social issues, literature, and the
arts in historical perspective. [3] (INT)
LAS 2301. Music of Protest and Social Change in Latin America.
[Formerly LAS 231] Politics of musical culture. Music both as a marker of
sociopolitical change and as an agent of political transformation. [3] (INT)
LAS 2601. Latin America, Latinos, and the United States. [Formerly
LAS 260] Immigration of Latin American and Caribbean peoples to the
United States and their experiences in this country. Required service work
and a research project in the Nashville Latino community. [3] (P)
LAS 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly LAS 289A] A program of independent readings or research to be selected in consultation with the
center’s undergraduate adviser. Open only to juniors and seniors. May be
repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined over a four
semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester
of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of LAS
3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
LAS 3852. Independent Study. [Formerly LAS 289B] A program of independent readings or research to be selected in consultation with the
center’s undergraduate adviser. Open only to juniors and seniors. May be
repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined over a four
semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester
of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of LAS
3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
LAS 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly LAS 280B] Under faculty supervision, students gain experience working in a variety of settings, such
as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research,
and social welfare organizations in the United States and Latin America.
Background reading and research will be completed in Latin American
Studies 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, Latin
American Studies 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may earn up to 6 hours
of 3881 credit. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end
of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90
grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Latin American Studies, and
prior approval of the director of undergraduate studies of the student’s
plans are required. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken
concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 cannot be included in the minimum
number of hours counted toward the Latin American Studies major or
minor. Corequisite: 3881. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)
LAS 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly LAS 280A]
Under faculty supervision, students gain experience working in a variety
of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media,
political, research, and social welfare organizations in the United States
and Latin America. Background reading and research will be completed in
Latin American Studies 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, Latin American Studies 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881
must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may
earn up to 6 hours of 3881 credit. A research paper and report must be
submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training

vanderbilt university
is completed. A 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Latin
American Studies, and prior approval of the director of undergraduate
studies of the student’s plans are required. Corequisite: 3880. [3-6] (No
AXLE credit)
LAS 3891. Special Topics in Latin American Studies. [Formerly LAS
294A] Selected special topics suitable for interdisciplinary examination
from the perspective of the social sciences and humanities. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[3] (No AXLE credit)
LAS 4550. Gender, Sexuality, and Family in Latin America. Evolution
of Latin American identity over time. [3] (INT)
LAS 4901. Research Seminar. [Formerly LAS 290] Selected topics for
the interdisciplinary study of Latin America. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Latino and Latina Studies
LATS 2201. Introduction to Latino and Latina Studies. [Formerly
LATS 201] Foundational course for interdisciplinary study of Americans of
Hispanic heritage and their communities. History and cultural production.
Interconnections and differences among diverse Hispanic communities.
[3] (P)
LATS 3831. Latino and Latina Business and Entrepreneurship.
[Formerly LATS 250] Research on Nashville’s growing Latino and Latina
communities. Types of businesses and how they function. Issues affecting
businesses within the communities. Work with local community leaders. A
service learning course. [3] (SBS)
LATS 3850. Independent Study. 1-3 credits per semester; maximum of
12 credits total for fours semesters of LATS 3850. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
LATS 4961. Latino and Latina Studies Seminar. [Formerly LATS 280]
Overview of cultural production, history, and political and socioeconomic
experiences of Hispanic people living in the United States. Synthesis of
issues, traditions, approaches, and problems. [3] (HCA)

Managerial Studies
MGRL 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly MGRL 99] Topics vary.
General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
MGRL 1100. Fundamentals of Management. [Formerly MGRL 194]
Entrepreneurship, strategy, marketing, operations, and finance. For-profit,
non-profit, and social enterprise organizations. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 1200. Fundamentals of Marketing. [Formerly MGRL 190] Creating customer value and building profitable customer relationships. Understanding customer needs, defining target markets, and crafting value
propositions. Case studies. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 2300. Entrepreneurship: The Business Planning Process.
[Formerly MGRL 196] Functional areas within companies, business plans
at various stages of company development, and critique of business plans
for investment suitability. Prerequisites: both 1100 and either FNEC 1600
or FNEC 1605; or BUS 2100. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 3105. Negotiation. [Formerly MGRL 185] Contemporary challenges in leading change in organizations and building effective management teams. The context and dynamics of negotiation; components,
structure, and management of negotiations; and varying requirements
across the spectrum of negotiation types. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 3110. Business Management. Seminar. Analysis of cases representing strategic decisions in operations, resource management, competitive balance, and product and service offerings. Prerequisite: 1100 (or
BUS 2700), and FNEC 1600 or 1605. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 3200. Advanced Marketing. [Formerly MGRL 191] Case study
of processes, techniques, and theories of marketing, including branding,
advertising, interactive media, sales promotion, and marketing research.

College of Arts and Science / Courses
Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: MGRL 1200 or BUS 2600.
[3] (SBS)
MGRL 3209. Creative Advertising. [Formerly MGRL 192] Examination
and practical application of the creative process in advertising. Creation of
marketing campaigns, including the integration of various media. Prerequisite: 1200 or BUS 2600. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 3250. Corporate Strategy. [Formerly MGRL 198] Examination
of the issues and challenges facing corporate management. Responsibilities and interrelationships of functional areas including marketing, finance,
operations, and R&D. Industry, competitor, and customer analysis. Design and implementation of corporate strategy. Informational and control
systems. Interpersonal skills for effective teamwork. Prerequisite: FNEC
1600. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 3255. Advanced Corporate Strategy. Relationship between organizational structure and strategy. Decision structures to achieve performance objectives. Analysis of team, competitor, and market issues and
dynamics. Prerequisite: BUS 2700. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 3300. Entrepreneurial Challenge. [Formerly MGRL 195] Simulation of the entrepreneurial experience from idea generation to funding.
Development of a complete business plan, including financial projections,
and competition for funding from investors. Offered on a graded basis
only. Prerequisite: 1100 or BUS 2100. [3] (SBS)
MGRL 3841. Directed Study. [Formerly MGRL 290] Directed readings
and related field research toward a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Limited to juniors and
seniors. [3] (No AXLE credit)
MGRL 3851. Independent Study in Managerial Studies. [Formerly
MGRL 245] A program of independent reading in consultation with an
adviser. Written permission of an instructor and the program director required. [Variable credit: 1-3; may not be repeated] (No AXLE credit)
MGRL 3891. Selected Topics in Managerial Studies. [Formerly MGRL
235] May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Mathematics
MATH 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly MATH 99] Topics vary.
General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
MATH 1005. Pre-calculus Mathematics. [Formerly MATH 133] Inequalities, functions and graphs, trigonometric identities, theory of equations.
Designed for students who plan to take either 1200-1201 or 1300-1301
but need a stronger background in algebra and trigonometry. [3] (No AXLE
credit)
MATH 1010. Probability and Statistical Inference. [Formerly MATH
127A] For students not planning to major in science, engineering, or
mathematics. Discrete and continuous probability models (exponential,
binomial, Poisson, normal). Law of large numbers; conditional probability
and Bayes theorem; counting techniques and combinatorics. Descriptive
statistics: measures of central tendency and dispersion, histograms. [3]
(No AXLE credit)
MATH 1011. Probability and Statistical Inference. [Formerly MATH
127B] For students not planning to major in science, engineering, or mathematics. Linear regression, correlation, hypothesis testing. Confidence intervals, sampling distributions, statistical inference. Prerequisite: 1010. [3]
(MNS)
MATH 1100. Survey of Calculus. [Formerly MATH 140] A basic course
in the rudiments of analytic geometry and differential and integral calculus
with emphasis on applications. Designed for students who do not plan further study in calculus. Students who have earned credit for 1200 or 1300
will earn only one credit for this course. Students who have earned credit
for 1201 will earn only three credits for this course. [4] (MNS)
MATH 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly MATH 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can ex-

191
press knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
MATH 1200. Single-Variable Calculus I. [Formerly MATH 150A] Review
of algebra and trigonometry. Exponential functions; inverse functions and
logarithms. Limits; differentiation of algebraic and transcendental functions; rules of differentiation; related rates. Three hours of lecture and one
hour of recitation period per week. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 1100. Students who have earned credit for 1300 will earn only
one credit for this course. [3] (MNS)
MATH 1201. Single-Variable Calculus II. [Formerly MATH 150B] Maximum and minimum values; curve sketching. Antiderivatives; the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus; areas and volumes; techniques of integration. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation period per week.
Students who have earned credit for 1100 or 1301 will earn only two credits for this course. Students who have earned credit for 1300 will earn only
one credit for this course. Prerequisite: 1200. [3] (MNS)
MATH 1300. Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus I. [Formerly MATH
155A] Functions, limits, differentiation of algebraic functions, integration,
applications including extrema problems, areas, volumes, centroids, and
work. Students who have earned credit for 1100 will earn only one credit
for this course. Students who have earned credit for 1200 or 1201 will earn
only two credits for this course. [4] (MNS)
MATH 1301. Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus II. [Formerly MATH
155B] Differentiation and integration of transcendental functions, applications, methods of integration, coordinate geometry, polar coordinates, infinite series. Students who have earned credit for 1201 will earn only three
credits for this course. Students who have earned credit for 2200 will earn
only one credit for this course. Prerequisite: 1300 or 1201. [4] (MNS)
MATH 2200. Single-Variable Calculus III. [Formerly MATH 170] Analytic geometry, parametric equations, polar coordinates, infinite series,
Taylor series. Repeat credit for students who completed 170a prior to fall
2008. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1301. Prerequisite: 1201. [3] (MNS)
MATH 2300. Multivariable Calculus. [Formerly MATH 175] Vectors,
curves, and surfaces in space. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, multiple integrals. Vector integral calculus, including line and surface integrals. Repeat credit for students who completed 170b prior to fall
2008. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2501. Students
who have earned credit for 2500 will earn only one credit for this course.
Prerequisite: 1301 or 2200. [3] (MNS)
MATH 2400. Differential Equations with Linear Algebra. [Formerly
MATH 196] Scalar differential equations, Laplace transforms, systems
of differential equations. Gauss-elimination, algebra of matrices, determinants, vector spaces, linear operators, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Intended for students in Biomedical Engineering, Electrical Engineering
and Computer Engineering. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 2410, 2420, or 2610. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2300. [4] (No AXLE
credit)
MATH 2410. Methods of Linear Algebra. [Formerly MATH 194] Vectors and matrix operations. Linear transformations and fundamental properties of finite dimensional vector spaces. Solutions of systems of linear
equations. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 2400, 2501, or 2600. Students who have earned credit
for 2500 will earn only two credits for this course. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2300. [3] (MNS)
MATH 2420. Methods of Ordinary Differential Equations. [Formerly
MATH 198] Linear first-order differential equations, applications, higher
order linear differential equations, complementary and particular solutions, applications, Laplace transform methods, series solutions, numerical techniques. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2400 or
2610. Prerequisite: 2300 or 2501. [3] (MNS)

A&S

192
MATH 2500. Multivariable Calculus and Linear Algebra. [Formerly
MATH 205A] Vector algebra and geometry; linear transformations and
matrix algebra. Real and complex vector spaces, systems of linear equations, inner product spaces. Functions of several variables and vectorvalued functions: limits, continuity, the derivative. Extremum and nonlinear
problems, manifolds. Multiple integrals, line and surface integrals, differential forms, integration on manifolds, theorems of Green, Gauss, and
Stokes. Eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Emphasis on rigorous proofs. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 2501, 2300, 2410, or 2600.
Open only to first-year students with a test score of 5 on the Calculus-BC
Advanced Placement examination. [4] (MNS)
MATH 2501. Multivariable Calculus and Linear Algebra. [Formerly
MATH 205B] Continuation of 2500. Vector algebra and geometry; linear
transformations and matrix algebra. Real and complex vector spaces,
systems of linear equations, inner product spaces. Functions of several
variables and vector-valued functions: limits, continuity, the derivative.
Extremum and nonlinear problems, manifolds. Multiple integrals, line and
surface integrals, differential forms, integration on manifolds, theorems of
Green, Gauss, and Stokes. Eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Emphasis on
rigorous proofs. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2300,
2410, or 2600. Prerequisite: 2500 and first-year standing. [4] (MNS)
MATH 2600. Linear Algebra. [Formerly MATH 204] Algebra of matrices,
real and complex vector spaces, linear transformations, and systems of
linear equations. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors, inner product spaces, and
orthonormal bases. Designed primarily for mathematics majors. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 2410 or 2501. Students who have
earned credit for 2500 will earn only two credits for this course. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2300. [3] (MNS)
MATH 2610. Ordinary Differential Equations. [Formerly MATH 208]
First- and second-order differential equations, applications. Matrix methods for linear systems; stability theory of autonomous systems; existence
and uniqueness theory. Intended for mathematics and advanced science
majors. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2400 or 2420.
Prerequisite: concurrent enrollment in 2501 or prior credit for either 2501
or both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 2810. Probability and Statistics for Engineering. [Formerly
MATH 216] Discrete and continuous probability functions, cumulative distributions. Normal distribution. Poisson distribution and Poisson process.
Conditional probability and Bayes’ formula. Point estimation and interval
estimation. Hypothesis testing. Covariance and correlation. Linear regression theory and the principle of least squares. Monte Carlo methods. Intended for students in Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 2820. Prerequisite: 2300
or 2501. [3] (No AXLE credit)
MATH 2820. Introduction to Probability and Mathematical Statistics. [Formerly MATH 218] Discrete and continuous probability models,
mathematical expectation, and joint densities. Laws of large numbers,
point estimation, and confidence intervals. Hypothesis testing and applications. Students taking 2820 are encouraged to take 2820L concurrently.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 2810. Prerequisite: 2300
or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 2820L. Statistics Laboratory. [Formerly MATH 218L] Applications of the theory developed in 2820. Emphasis on data analysis and
interpretation. Topics include the one- and two-sample problems, paired
data, correlation and regression, chi-square, and model building. Pre- or
corequisite: 2810 or 2820. [1] (No AXLE credit)
MATH 2821. Introduction to Applied Statistics. [Formerly MATH 219]
Review of basic applied statistics. Analysis of variance as a technique for
interpreting experimental data. Generalized likelihood ratio principle, confounding, multiple comparisons, introduction to response surface methodology, and nonparameteric methods. Experimental designs: completely
randomized, nested, orthogonal contrasts, randomized block, Latin
squares, factorial, and fractional factorial. Prerequisite: 2810 or 2820. [3]
(MNS)

vanderbilt university
MATH 3000. History of Mathematics. [Formerly MATH 252] Major developments in mathematics from ancient times to the early twentieth century. Emphasis both on the historical perspective and the mathematics;
assignments include many exercises and theorems. Highly recommended
for teacher candidates. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410
or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3010. Intensive Problem Solving and Exposition. [Formerly
MATH 200] Intended to develop widely-applicable mathematical skills.
Basic principles such as induction, the pigeonhole principle, symmetry,
parity, and generating functions. Prerequisite: 2300 or 2500. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3100. Introduction to Analysis. [Formerly MATH 260] Properties of real numbers, compactness and completeness. Limits, sequences
and series, uniform convergence, and power series. Basic properties of
functions on the real line, and the elementary theory of differentiation and
integration. Emphasis on methods of proof used in advanced mathematics courses. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600. [3]
(MNS)
MATH 3110. Complex Variables. [Formerly MATH 261] Complex numbers, analytic and elementary functions, transformations of regions. Complex integrals, Cauchy’s integral theorem and formula, Taylor and Laurent
series. The calculus of residues with applications, conformal mappings.
Prerequisite: 2300 or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3120. Introduction to Partial Differential Equations. [Formerly
MATH 234] Initial- and boundary-value problems for partial differential
equations using separation of variables in conjunction with Fourier series
and integrals. Explicit solutions of problems involving the heat equation,
the wave equation, and Laplace’s equation. Prerequisite: Either 2410,
2600, or 2501 and either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3130. Fourier Analysis. [Formerly MATH 263] Fourier series topics including convolution, Poisson kernels, Dirichlet kernels, and pointwise
and mean-square convergence. Integral transforms including one-dimensional and multidimensional Fourier integrals, Fourier inversion formula and
Plancherel theorem, Poisson summation formula, Radon transform, and
X-ray transform. Fourier analysis on Abelian groups including finite Fourier analysis and fast Fourier transform. Applications to signal processing,
Shannon sampling theory, and/or compressed sensing. Repeat credit for
students who completed 267 section 1 in spring 2011 or spring 2013.
Prerequisite: Either 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3165. Advanced Calculus. [Formerly MATH 259] Advanced
treatment of multivariable calculus. Differentiation of functions of several
variables, including inverse and implicit function theorems. Vector differential calculus. Integration of functions of several variables. Vector integral calculus, including Stokes’ theorem. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 3600. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410
or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3200. Introduction to Topology. [Formerly MATH 242] Open
sets, closed sets, continuity, compactness, and connectivity. Subspaces,
product spaces, and quotient spaces. Knot theory, topology of surfaces,
and applications. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3210. Transformation Geometry. [Formerly MATH 240] Transformations of the plane, groups of transformations, reflections, glide reflections, classification of the isometries of the plane, frieze groups, analysis
of frieze patterns, wall paper groups, and analysis of wall paper patterns.
Especially recommended for prospective teachers of mathematics. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3230. Introduction to Differential Geometry. Smooth maps,
tangent space, and surfaces and hypersurfaces in n-dimensional Euclidean space. Inverse and Implicit Function theorems. Sard’s theorem.
Transversality. Degree of a map; intersection theory modulo 2. Orientability
and oriented intersection number. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 4220. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600.
[3] (MNS)
MATH 3300. Abstract Algebra. [Formerly MATH 223] Fundamental
properties of integers and polynomials. Elementary properties of groups,

College of Arts and Science / Courses
rings, integral domains, fields, and lattices. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or
2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3310. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. [Formerly MATH
250] Development of the first order predicate calculus and fundamental
metamathematical notions. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3320. Error-Correcting Codes and Cryptography. [Formerly
MATH 253] Applications of algebra to reliability and secrecy of information transmission. Error-correcting codes, including linear, Hamming, and
cyclic codes, and possibly BCH or Reed-Solomon codes. Cryptography,
including symmetric-key, DES and RSA encryption. Prerequisite: 2410,
2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3600. Advanced Engineering Mathematics. [Formerly MATH
229] Vector analysis including directional derivatives, transformation of
coordinates, divergence and curl. Line integrals, surface integrals, and
divergence theorem. Stokes’ theorem. Functions of a complex variable,
including limits, derivatives, and Cauchy-Riemann equations. Exponential,
trigonometric, hyperbolic, and logarithmic functions. Complex integrals,
Cauchy’s integral theorem and formula. Taylor and Laurent series. Calculus of residues. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3165.
Prerequisite: 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3620. Introduction to Numerical Mathematics. [Formerly
MATH 226] Numerical solution of linear and nonlinear equations, interpolation and polynomial approximation, non-numerical differentiation and integration. Least-squares curve fitting and approximation theory, numerical
solution of differential equations, errors and floating point arithmetic. Application of the theory to problems in science, engineering, and economics. Student use of the computer is emphasized. Familiarity with computer
programming is expected. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and
either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3630. Mathematical Modeling in Biology and Medicine. [Formerly MATH 262] Basic mathematical modeling tools, such as interpolation, least-squares regression, difference equations, and ordinary and
partial differential equations. Statistical analysis of data, support vector
machines, and computer simulation. Familiarity with computer programming is expected. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and either
2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3640. Probability. [Formerly MATH 247] Combinatorics, probability models (binomial, Poisson, normal, gamma, etc.) Stochastic independence, generating functions, limit theorems and types of convergence,
bivariate distributions, transformations of variables. Markov processes,
applications. Except for students with extremely strong backgrounds,
2820 should be taken prior to 3640. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and
either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3641. Mathematical Statistics. [Formerly MATH 248] Distribution theory, order statistics, theory of point estimation and hypothesis
testing, normal univariate inference, Bayesian methods, sequential procedures, regression, nonparametric methods. Students interested in applications may take 2820L. Prerequisite: 3640. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3650. Introduction to Actuarial Mathematics. [Formerly MATH
246A] Applications of calculus and probability to actuarial science. The
foundations of financial mathematics, including the theory of interest. Prerequisite: 2300 or 2501. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2810, 2820, or 3640.
[3] (MNS)
MATH 3651. Actuarial Models. [Formerly MATH 246B] Probabilistic
analysis of insurance. Single-life models, including time-value of benefits,
life annuities, premiums, and benefit reserves: Multiple-decrement models; Multiple-life models. Probabilistic topics: Markov chains and Poisson
processes. Prerequisite: 3650 and either 2810, 2820 or 3640. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3660. Mathematical Modeling in Economics. [Formerly MATH
256] Modeling microeconomic problems of supply and demand, profit
maximization, and Nash equilibrium pricing. Auctions and bargaining
models. Statistical models and data analysis. Computational experiments.
Prerequisite: 2300 or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3700. Discrete Mathematics. [Formerly MATH 215] Elementary
combinatorics including permutations and combinations, the principle of

193
inclusion and exclusion, and recurrence relations. Graph theory including Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs, trees, planarity, coloring, connectivity, network flows, some algorithms and their complexity. Selected topics from computer science and operations research. Prerequisite: 2410,
2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3800. Theory of Numbers. [Formerly MATH 221] Factorization
of integers, Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, congruences, Wilson’s
theorem. Fermat’s theorem, arithmetic functions, perfect numbers, Law of
Quadratic Reciprocity. Diophantine equations, Pythagorean triples, sums
of squares. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 3859. Independent Study. [Formerly MATH 298] Reading and independent study in mathematics under the supervision of an adviser. Designed primarily for honors candidates, but open to others with approval
by department chair. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, not to exceed 6
without departmental permission] (No AXLE credit)
MATH 3890. Selected Topics for Undergraduates. [Formerly MATH
267] Topics vary. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3890 and
3895 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2501 or
both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for
all semesters of MATH 3890 and 3895 combined] (No AXLE credit)
MATH 4110. Partial Differential Equations. [Formerly MATH 294] Classification of equations: equations of elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic
type. Separation of variables, orthonormal series, solutions of homogeneous and nonhomogeneous boundary value problems in one-, two-, and
three-dimensional space. Possible additional topics include subharmonic
functions and the Perron existence theorem for the Laplace equation of
Sturm-Liouville theory. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and either
2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4200. Topology. [Formerly MATH 272A] Connectedness, compactness, countability, and separation axioms. Complete metric spaces.
Function spaces. Prerequisite: 2501, 3200, or 4220. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4201. Topology. [Formerly MATH 272B] The fundamental group
and covering spaces. Topology of surfaces. Simplicial complexes and homology theory. Homotopy theory. Prerequisite: 4200. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4220. Differentiable Manifolds. [Formerly MATH 243] Manifolds
in n-dimensional Euclidean space, smooth maps; inverse and implicit
function theorems. Regular value theorem, immersions and submersions,
Sard’s theorem, and transversality. Degree of a map; winding numbers
and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra; intersection theory modulo 2.
Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4300. Modern Algebra. [Formerly MATH 283A] Group theory
through Sylow theorems and fundamental theorem of finitely generated
abelian groups. Prerequisite: 3300. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4301. Modern Algebra. [Formerly MATH 283B] Introductory theory of commutative rings and fields, and additional topics such as Galois
theory, modules over a principal ideal domain and finite dimensional algebras. Prerequisite: 4300. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4310. Set Theory. [Formerly MATH 280] The basic operations on
sets. Cardinal and ordinal numbers. The axiom of choice. Zorn’s lemma,
and the well-ordering principle. Introduction to the topology of metric
spaces, including the concepts of continuity, compactness, connectivity,
completeness, and separability. Product spaces. Applications to Euclidean spaces. Strongly recommended for beginning graduate students and
for undergraduates who plan to do graduate work in mathematics. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4320. Lattice Theory and the Theory of Ordered Sets. [Formerly MATH 284] An introduction to basic concepts and theorems in lattice theory and the theory of ordered sets with connections to universal
algebra and computer science. Boolean algebras, modular and distributive lattices, ordered topological spaces, algebraic lattices and domains,
fixed point theorems, cosets, free lattices. Prerequisite: 3300. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4600. Numerical Analysis. [Formerly MATH 286] Finite difference
and variational methods for elliptic boundary value problems, finite difference methods for parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations,

A&S

194
and the matrix eigenvalue problem. Student use of the computer is emphasized. Prerequisite: 3620. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4610. Methods of Mathematical Physics. [Formerly MATH 292]
Linear operators on vector spaces, matrix theory, and Hilbert spaces.
Functions of a complex variable and calculus of residues. Ordinary and
partial differential equations of mathematical physics, boundary value
problems, special functions. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and
either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4620. Linear Optimization. [Formerly MATH 288] An introduction
to linear programming and its applications. Formulation of linear programs.
The simplex method, duality, complementary slackness, dual simplex
method and sensitivity analysis. The ellipsoid method. Interior point methods. Possible additional topics include the primal-dual algorithm, cutting
planes, or branch-and-bound. Applications to networks, management,
engineering, and physical sciences. Prerequisite: either 2410, 2600, or
2501, and either CS 1101 or 1103. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4630. Nonlinear Optimization. [Formerly MATH 287] Mathematical modeling of optimization problems. Theory of unconstrained and constrained optimization, including convexity and the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker
conditions. Derivative- and non-derivative-based methods. Familiarity with
computer programming is expected. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and
either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4650. Financial Stochastic Processes. [Formerly MATH 249A]
The theory of stochastic processes and applications to financial economics. Brownian motion; martingales; Itô’s Lemma; stochastic integration.
Monte Carlo simulations with variance reduction techniques. Applications
include discretetime option pricing and delta hedging. Prerequisite: 3650
and either 2810, 2820, or 3640. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4651. Evaluation of Actuarial Models. [Formerly MATH 249B]
Applications of statistics to the evaluation and selection of actuarial models. Severity, frequency, and aggregate models. Measure of risk. Applications of Bayesian analysis to credibility theory. Simulation and bootstrap
methods. Prerequisite: 3651, 3641, and 4650. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4700. Combinatorics. [Formerly MATH 274] Elements of enumerative analysis including permutations, combinations, generating functions,
recurrence relations, the principle of inclusion and exclusion, and Polya’s
theorem. Some special topics will be treated as class interest and background indicate (e.g., Galois fields, theory of codes, and block designs).
Students unfamiliar with permutations, combinations, and basic counting
techniques should take 3700 prior to 4700. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or
2501. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4710. Graph Theory. [Formerly MATH 275] The mathematical
theory of networks. Traversing graphs using paths, cycles, and trails.
Matchings and other graph factors. Coloring of vertices and edges. Connectivity and its relation to paths and flows. Embeddings of graphs in surfaces, especially the plane. Prerequisite: linear algebra. Students unfamiliar
with basic ideas of graph theory, including paths, cycles, and trees, should
take 3700 prior to 4710. [3] (MNS)
MATH 4999. Senior Thesis. [Formerly MATH 269] A written presentation of research results, original for the student but not usually original in
the larger sense. The regulations governing the writing of a master of arts
thesis in mathematics will apply to the writing of the senior thesis. [3] (No
AXLE credit)

Medicine, Health, and Society
MHS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly MHS 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly MHS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

vanderbilt university
MHS 1920. Politics of Health. [Formerly MHS 170] Sociocultural analysis of the conflicts, definitions, inequalities, and structures of power that
influence health. [3] (P)
MHS 1930. Social Dimensions of Health and Illness. [Formerly MHS
201] Multidisciplinary introduction to health conditions from perspectives
of anthropology, economics, history, political science and policy studies,
philosophy, religious studies, and sociology. Guest lectures by representatives of various disciplines. [3] (P)
MHS 1940. Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities. [Formerly MHS 180]
Relationship between health outcomes and race and ethnicity. Historical
and contemporary factors influencing differences in health outcomes, including mental health, HIV/AIDS, and other chronic diseases. Explanations
of health disparities and of strategies to reduce them. [3] (SBS)
MHS 1950. Theories of the Body. Interdisciplinary study of the human
body through critical theory, history, philosophy, art, and popular culture.
How cultural understandings of bodies reflect broader social, political, scientific, and legal regimes. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 290-02 in fall 2013. [3] (HCA)
MHS 2110. American Medicine and the World. [Formerly MHS 208]
Social foundations of medical authority. Health disparities in the United
States and abroad. Effects of social settings of medical research, evaluation, and treatment on health outcomes. Inequalities in medical knowledge
and institutions. No credit for students who earned credit for 290 section
3 in fall 2012. [3] (P)
MHS 2120. Health Social Movements. [Formerly MHS 210] Health inequality and inequity based on race, ethnicity, gender, class, and sexuality. Issues related to access to health care services. Crusades for certain
diseases, illness experiences, and disabilities. Challenging science on etiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. No credit for students who
earned credit for 290 section 1 in fall 2012. [3] (P)
MHS 2130. Social Movements and Community Action. [Formerly
MHS 211] The literature of social activism. How citizens individually and
collectively accomplish and resist social change. Historical and contemporary health movements as case studies to illustrate the advantages and
limitations of social change strategies. [3] (SBS)
MHS 2150. Medical Humanities. [Formerly MHS 248] Conceptual and
creative analysis of philosophy, literature, art, and music to identify and
account for human nature in the medical context. Ethical, practical, and
social management of medical technology. Theories of art, music, and
literature to understand human creativity and self-explanation in the face of
illness and difference. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed
295 section 2 in either spring 2010 or spring 2009. [3] (HCA)
MHS 2230. Masculinity and Men’s Health. [Formerly MHS 232] Interdisciplinary approach to men’s health issues and to perceptions of masculinity. The history of men’s diseases. Men in clinical settings. Social policies that affect men’s health behaviors. No credit for students who earned
credit for 290 section 5 in fall 2012. [3] (P)
MHS 2240. Bionic Bodies, Disability Cultures. [Formerly MHS 242]
Historical and cultural evolution of prosthetics, artificial limbs, and other
assistive technologies. Shifts in social views resulting from war, economics, and art and design. [3] (HCA)
MHS 2250. War and the Body. [Formerly MHS 212] Impact of war on
the human body. Anthropology of the body and theories of bodily experience. Production, representation, and experience of war and of military
and medical technologies on a bodily level. Acceptable and unacceptable
types of harm. No credit for students who earned credit for 290 section 2
in fall 2012. [3] (P)
MHS 2310. Chinese Society and Medicine. [Formerly MHS 231] Medicine and health in contemporary China. Social organization of medical
care, social determinants of health and disease, social construction of
health and disease, and health-related social problems. Serves as repeat
credit for students who completed 290 section 3 in fall 2010 and section
1 in fall 2011. [3] (SBS)
MHS 2320. Medicine, Law, and Society. [Formerly MHS 244] Survey
of issues in medicine and law, including the physician-patient relationship,

College of Arts and Science / Courses
medical malpractice, organ donation, healthcare financing, and the limits
and powers of the government to protect the public’s health. Serves as
repeat credit for students who completed 290 section 3 in fall 2010, 290
section 2 in spring 2010, or 290 section 2 in spring 2009. [3] (SBS)
MHS 2330. Men’s Health Research & Policy. [Formerly MHS 234] Concepts and theories of men’s health. Global and domestic issues. Effect of
men’s social and economic advantages on health outcomes. Strategies
to improve men’s health; relationships between cultural values and health
policy; and cultural explanations that shape men’s health campaigns. No
credit for students who earned credit for 290 section 14 in spring 2013.
[3] (SBS)
MHS 2350. Italian Representations of Wellness and Illness. From
1300 to the present. Depictions of health and sickness in Italian literature,
art, and film. Historical, cultural, and social dimensions of health in Italy
and changes in the societal approach to health. Italian society’s views on
health, wellness, and the stigmatization of physical and mental illness. [3]
(INT)
MHS 2410. HIV/AIDS in the Global Community. [Formerly MHS 236]
Medical, social, political, economic, and public policy dimensions of HIV/
AIDS. Prevention and treatment strategies, social stigma, and discrimination. Repeat credit for students who completed 290 section 2 in fall 2009
and for students who completed 290 section 5 in fall 2008. [3] (P)
MHS 2420. Economic Demography and Global Health. [Formerly
MHS 206] Economic consequences of demographic change in developing and developed countries. Links between socioeconomic status and
health; relationship between health and economic growth; determinants
of fertility, mortality, and migration. [3] (SBS)
MHS 2430. Social Capital and Health. [Formerly MHS 240] Theoretical
approaches to social capital and their applications to the social production
of disease and illness. Theoretical background of social capital; the conceptualization and measurement of social capital; and the multiple roles of
social capital as a social antecedent of health. Serves as repeat credit for
students who completed 290 section 5 in spring 2010 and section 1 in
spring 2011. [3] (SBS)
MHS 2510. Caring for Vulnerable Populations. [Formerly MHS 237]
Humanitarian aid and the risks and responsibilities in providing for vulnerable populations. Differences between acute and chronic crises. Geopolitical, cultural, clinical, and practical factors. Serves as repeat credit for
students who completed 290 section 3 in spring 2010 and for students
who completed 290 section 4 in either spring 2009 or spring 2008. [3] (No
AXLE credit)
MHS 2520. Autism in Context. [Formerly MHS 250] Multiple manifestations. Impact, questions, and debates. Familial, educational, sociological,
legal, and medical contexts. [3] (SBS)
MHS 2610. Global Health Crises. Development of global health priorities, responses to emerging crises, and unintended consequences of
global health interventions. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 3890-01 offered fall 2015 or 3890-02 offered spring 2016. [3] (INT)

195
MHS 3000. Undergraduate Seminar. [Formerly MHS 295] Advanced
reading, research, and writing. Topics vary. Limited to juniors and seniors
with preference to majors in Medicine, Health, and Society. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may
enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Offered on a
graded basis only. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of MHS
3000] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 3010. Global Health Principles and Practice. Introduction to
major global health principles and practices in the developing and developed world. Perspectives of public health practitioners and critical thinking
about global health challenges and solutions. [3] (P)
MHS 3020. U.S. Public Health Ethics and Policy. [Formerly MHS 203]
Critical perspectives on ethical and policy issues in U.S. public health. [3]
(P)
MHS 3030. Community Health Research. [Formerly MHS 235] Conceptual and methodological challenges. Focus on descriptive studies and
intervention research to address health disparities in chronic diseases and
psychiatric disorders. [3] (SBS)
MHS 3040. Designing Healthy Publics. Politics of public health and the
built environment in U.S. cities from the nineteenth century to the present.
Critical perspectives on health promotion, research, and design. Nashville
as a case study. No credit for students who earned credit for 248 in fall
2014. [3] (US)
MHS 3050W. Medicine and Literature. [Formerly MHS 205W] Narrative analysis, and other humanistic, interpretative practices of relevance to
medicine and health. [3] (HCA)
MHS 3110. Global Health and Social Justice. [Formerly MHS 204]
Global health institutions, policies, and practices. Issues of social justice.
Anthropological, sociological, and scientific studies that address the social, moral, political and economic factors influencing the definition of and
response to global health problems. No credit for students who earned
credit for 290 section 4 in fall 2012. [3] (P)
MHS 3120. Medicine, Technology, and Society. [Formerly MHS 245]
Tensions between art and science in medicine. The effect of science and
technology on the doctor-patient relationship. Social and ethical issues
raised by new biomedical developments. Repeat credit for students who
completed 295 section 1 in fall 2009. [3] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 3140. Afrofuturism and Cultural Criticisms of Medicine. [Formerly MHS 216] Exploration of Afrofuturism as a literary genre and its critique of the impact of techno-science and medicine on black health, life,
and futurity. Multidisciplinary approach in understanding novels, memoirs,
and secondary texts. No credit for students who earned credit for 290
section 3 in fall 2013. [3] (HCA)
MHS 3150. Death and Dying in America. [Formerly MHS 225] Interdisciplinary introduction to thanatology; changes in medicine and attitudes
towards dying as they reshape the American way of death in a multicultural landscape. [3] (P)

MHS 2920. Medicine on Trial. Medicine as an object of dispute and a
source of evidence in courts of law. Key cases and issues in Western law.
Medicine adjudicated in religious, military, tribal, national, and international
courts. No credit for students who have earned credit for 290-01 offered
fall 2014. [3] (SBS)

MHS 3210. Health, Development, and Culture in Guatemala. [Formerly MHS 281A] Social dimensions of health in Guatemalan communities. History, culture, and political economy. Spanish language skills
strongly recommended. No credit for students who earned credit for INDS
270a section 3 in spring 2010 or 218 in spring 2014. Instructor consent
required. [3] (INT)

MHS 2940. Race, Citizenship, and Health. Social and historical impacts of immigration, settlement, nation formation, labor exploitation, imperialism, and globalization on populations categorized as victims, vectors
of disease, or sanitary citizens. Health as a key site in which the meaning of
race and citizenship are developed and navigated. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 3000 offered fall 2016 or spring 2017. [3] (P)

MHS 3212. Health, Development, and Culture in Guatemala. [Formerly MHS 218B] Social and political dimensions of health and development in Guatemala through fieldwork and service learning in rural Maya
communities in Quetzaltenango and Sololá. Prerequisite: 3210. [1-3] (No
AXLE credit)

MHS 2950. Healing Animals. Animals as subjects of medical research
and as patients in veterinary medicine. Health of animals as friends, food,
entertainment, and vectors of disease. Celebration and concealment of
the centrality of animals in modern medicine through legal, economic, social, and emotional techniques. No credit for students who earned credit
for 290-03 offered spring 2015. [3] (P)

MHS 3220. Healthcare Organizations. [Formerly MHS 222] Key healthcare organizations in the context of policies governing the U.S. healthcare
system. How organizations and policies shape the meaning of health and
the dynamics of medical encounters. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 295 in spring 2012. [3] (SBS)

A&S

196
MHS 3250. Perspectives on Trauma. [Formerly MHS 254] Trauma as
a framework for understanding individual and collective suffering. Trauma
in the context of medicine, war, and politics, and of racial, sexual, and
gender inequalities. Alternative ways of conceptualizing feeling, memory
and loss. No credit for students who earned credit for 295 section 02 in
spring 2013. [3] (SBS)
MHS 3310. Health Care in France and the U.S. [Formerly MHS 256]
Comparison of contemporary health care systems and the evolution of
medicine and health policies in France and the United States. Includes
travel to France to visit health care delivery centers and meet with health
professionals. Knowledge of French is not required. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 290 section 1 in summer 2014. [3] (INT)
MHS 3320. Introduction to U.S. Health Care Policy. Key features of
U.S. health care system. Financing and delivery; historical trends; and
comparisons to other countries. Methods of health policy evaluation. [3]
(SBS)
MHS 3350. Medicine, Religion, and Spirituality. [Formerly MHS 246]
How individuals, families, and communities deal with such life events as
birth, serious illness and injury, disability, war, and death through the
combined belief in medicine and religion. Sources include fiction, poetry,
drama, film, and texts. Research seminar. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 295 section 2 in either fall 2009 or fall 2008. [3] (No
AXLE credit)
MHS 3450. Mental Illness Narratives. Mental illness experiences
through memoir, film, and spoken word. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 3890-01 offered spring 2017 or 3890-02 offered fall
2016. [3] (P)
MHS 3830. Service Learning. [Formerly MHS 294A] Under faculty supervision, students will design a program of community service associated
with a set of learning objectives. The service component (3830) should
benefit both the recipient and the provider of the service, offering the latter opportunities for self-reflection, self-discovery, and the development of
values, skills, and knowledge. A central objective must be firsthand experience of a central issue or issues studied in sociology, psychology, political
science, economics, or another academic discipline. The MHS program
will work to find placements for interested students. The other component,
3831, will consist of an independent study in the relevant discipline and
must be closely linked to the issue(s) addressed in 3830. For example,
a student may provide services to the elderly in nursing homes and use
3831 to study how state and federal policies affect the delivery of health
care and other services to nursing home populations. To be accepted,
students must have a 2.90 overall grade point average and 6 hours of prior
work in approved MHS courses. They must submit a specific plan for the
service-learning experience to the MHS program director. Must be taken
Pass/Fail and concurrently with 3831. These hours shall not be included
in the minimum hours required for the MHS major or minor. After completing the experience, all students must write a thorough report. Corequisite:
3831. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 3831. Service Learning Research and Readings. [Formerly MHS
294B] Under faculty supervision, students will design a program of community service associated with a set of learning objectives. The service
component (3830) should benefit both the recipient and the provider of the
service, offering the latter opportunities for self-reflection, self-discovery,
and the development of values, skills, and knowledge. A central objective must be firsthand experience of a central issue or issues studied in
sociology, psychology, political science, economics, or another academic
discipline. The MHS program will work to find placements for interested
students. The other component – 3831 – will consist of an independent
study in the relevant discipline and must be closely linked to the issue(s)
addressed in 3830. For example, a student may provide services to the
elderly in nursing homes and use 3831 to study how state and federal
policies affect the delivery of health care and other services to nursing
home populations. To be accepted, students must have a 2.90 overall
grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in approved MHS courses.
They must submit a specific plan for the service-learning experience to
the MHS program director. Students will write a substantial research or
interpretative paper under the supervision of a Vanderbilt faculty member

vanderbilt university
on a topic related to their service learning experience. Corequisite: 3830.
[1-3] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly MHS 296] A program of reading and/or research in one area of MHS studies to be selected in consultation with an adviser. Normally limited to qualified MHS minors or majors.
Approval of faculty adviser and MHS program director required for enrollment. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic,
but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment.
(However, students in the MHS honors program may count a total of 12
hours in MHS 3850, including the 6 hours in the senior year devoted to
preparation of the honors thesis. The same instructor will ordinarily supervise work on the honors thesis in both fall and spring semesters; a
student may work with a thesis adviser who has previously supervised an
independent study with that student.) [1-3; maximum of 6 credits for all
semesters of MHS 3850; maximum of 12 credits for students in the MHS
honors program] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly MHS 293A] Under faculty
supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad
range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs devoted
to health care, public health, health-related policy and research. Two options are available. (1) Full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in
3880, and 6 hours in 3881. (2) Part-time: 2-9 hours total, including 1-6
hours in 3880 and 1-3 hours in 3881. To be accepted for either option,
students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6 hours of prior work
in approved MHS courses; they must submit a specific plan for the internship to the MHS program director. After completing the internship, all students must write a thorough report. Note: All work for an internship must
be completed during a single semester or summer. Must be taken Pass/
Fail and concurrently with 3881. These hours shall not be included in the
minimum hours required for the MHS major or minor. Corequisite: 3881.
[Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly MHS 293B]
Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and
programs devoted to health care, public health, health-related policy and
research. Two options are available. (1) Full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, and 6 hours in 3881. (2) Part-time: 2-9 hours
total, including 1-6 hours in 3880 and 1-3 hours in 3881. To be accepted
for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6
hours of prior work in approved MHS courses; they must submit a specific
plan for the internship to the MHS program director. After completing the
internship, all students must write a thorough report. Note: All work for
an internship must be completed during a single semester or summer.
Students will write a substantial research or interpretative paper under
the supervision of a regular Vanderbilt faculty member. Corequisite: 3880.
[Variable credit: 1-6] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly MHS 290] May be repeated for
credit twice if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 9 credits
total for all semesters of MHS 3890] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 4010. Psychiatry, Culture, and Globalization. [Formerly MHS
252] Cross-cultural analysis of mental illness; the emergence of cultural
psychiatry; and the globalization of biopsychiatry and neuroscience. No
credit for students who earned credit for 295 section 2 in fall 2012. [3] (P)
MHS 4050. Narrative and Medicine: Stories of Illness and the Doctor-Patient Relationship. [Formerly MHS 220] Use of classical and contemporary illness narratives to understand the doctor-patient relationship.
Focus on patient stories in clinical settings. [3] (HCA)
MHS 4998. Honors Research. [Formerly MHS 297] Offered on a graded
basis only. Limited to seniors admitted to the departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE credit)
MHS 4999. Honors Thesis. [Formerly MHS 298] Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to seniors admitted to the departmental honors program.
[3] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses

Military Science
MS 1510. American Military History: Principles of War. [Formerly MS
151] Offered on a pass/fail basis only. [3]

Naval Science
NS 1100. Introduction to Naval Science (Navy and Marine option).
[Formerly NS 100] No Credit Toward Current Degree. [3]
NS 1300. Naval Operations (Navy option). [Formerly NS 130] No Credit
Toward Current Degree. [3]
NS 2410. Organization and Management (Navy & Marine option).
[Formerly NS 241] [3]
NS 2420. Leadership and Ethics (Navy & Marine option). [Formerly
NS 242] No Credit Toward Current Degree. [3]

Neuroscience
NSC 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly NSC 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 2060. Elective (Cellular and Molecular). [Formerly 71AT] This
course has no Vanderbilt equivalent. Credit is eligible to count toward the
Cellular and Molecular elective.
NSC 2065. Elective (Systems and Integrative). [Formerly 72AT] This
course has no Vanderbilt equivalent. Credit is eligible to count toward the
Systems and Integrative elective.
NSC 2201. Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC 201] Physiology of nerve cells,
sensory and motor systems, sleep, speech, and sexual behavior. Clinical
topics include the chemical basis of psychosis, diseases of the brain, and
repair mechanisms after brain injury. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3235. Biological Basis of Mental Disorders. [Formerly NSC 235]
Cellular and molecular neuropathology of cortical dysfunction resulting
from affective disorders, drug addiction, neurodegenerative disease, and
stroke. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3240. Neurobiology of Addiction. Neural basis of the regulation
and dysregulation of reward processing. Pathophysiology of addiction. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 3891 section 01 offered
spring 2016. Prerequisite 2201. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3245. Drug Discovery for Neuropsychiatric Disorders. Discovery and development of novel medicines for neurological and psychiatric
illness. History of drug discovery, target identification and validation, and
medicinal chemistry. In vitro high-throughput screening, drug metabolism,
and pharmacokinetics. No credit for students who have earned credit for
3891-01 offered fall 2015. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3260. Psychopharmacology. [Formerly NSC 260] Actions of therapeutic drugs for psychiatric disorders and of drugs of abuse. Molecular
mechanisms of effects on perception, cognition, and emotion. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3269. Developmental Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC 269] Normal
and abnormal brain development. Cell division, migration, and death; synapse formation and plasticity; and clinical syndromes. Prerequisite: 2201.
[3] (MNS)
NSC 3270. Computational Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC 270] Theoretical, mathematical, and simulation models of neurons, neural networks,
or brain systems. Computational approaches to analyzing and understanding data such as neurophysiological, electrophysiological, or brain
imaging. Demonstrations simulating neural models. Prerequisite: 2201,
either CS 1101 or 1103, and either MATH 1200 or 1300. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3272. Structure and Function of the Cerebral Cortex. [Formerly
NSC 272] Classic and current concepts of cerebral function. Species differences, receptive field organization, neurotransmitters, modifications by
experience, and behavioral effects. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)

197
NSC 3274. Neuroanatomy. [Formerly NSC 274] Gross structure, histological architecture, and techniques for creating images of the human
brain. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3851. Independent Reading in Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC
291] Reading and discussion of research papers on a selected topic under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both faculty sponsor and the
director of honors and independent study is required. May be repeated for
credit once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only
up to 1 credit per semester of enrollment. [1; maximum of 2 credits for all
semesters of NSC 3851] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3860. Introduction to Neuroscience Research.. [Formerly NSC
190] Research and reading in the laboratory of a member of the Neuroscience Program. Consent of the Director of Honors and Independent
Research is required. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 290. [1] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3861. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly NSC 292A] Original
student research on a defined problem in neuroscience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the
director of honors and independent studies is required. Prerequisite: 3860
or both 2201 and sophomore standing. [2] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3862. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly NSC 292B] Continuation of 3861. Original student research on a defined problem in neuroscience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty
sponsor and the director of honors and independent studies is required.
Prerequisite: 3861. [2] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3863. Advanced Research in Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC
293A] Original student research on a defined problem in neuroscience
under the direction of a faculty sponsor with some independence in the
design and execution of the project. Consent of both the faculty sponsor
and the director of honors and independent studies is required. Prerequisite: 3862. [3] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3864. Advanced Research in Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC
293B] Continuation of a research project on a defined problem in neuroscience under the direction of a faculty sponsor with some independence
in the design and execution of the project. Consent of both the faculty
sponsor and the director of honors and independent studies is required.
May be taken for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to
3 credits per semester. Prerequisite 3863. [3] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3871. Evaluation of Clinical Neuroscience Practice I. First of a
two-semester immersion experience. Shadow a doctor, prepare a systematic review or meta-analysis on an observed procedure or intervention.
Prerequisite: junior or senior class standing, major in Neuroscience, and
approval of instructor. [2] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3872. Evaluation of Clinical Neuroscience Practice II. Second
of a two-semester immersion experience. Empirical evaluation of clinical
neuroscience medical practice. Prepare a systematic review or metaanalysis on an observed procedure or intervention. Prerequisite: junior or
senior class standing, major in Neuroscience, 3871, and approval of instructor. [2] (No AXLE credit)
NSC 3891. Special Topics in Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience.
[Formerly NSC 285] May be repeated for credit more than once if there is
no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of
this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)
NSC 3892. Special Topics in Systems and Integrative Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC 287] May be repeated for credit more than once if
there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)
NSC 4961. Integrative Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC 255] Structure
and function of nervous systems. Emphasis on the vertebrate brain and
the relationship of anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry to sensory perception, cognition, motor activity, and learning and memory. Prerequisite:
2201 and senior standing. [3] (MNS)
NSC 4969. Senior Seminar in Neuroscience. [Formerly NSC 299]
Seminar with advanced reading, discussion, and writing on a specific topic
in neuroscience. Limited to seniors. [3] (No AXLE Credit)

A&S

198
NSC 4999. Honors Research. [Formerly NSC 296] Participation in a research project under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both
the faculty sponsor and the director of honors and independent study is
required. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may
earn only up to 4 credits per semester of enrollment. [2-4] (No AXLE credit)

Philosophy
PHIL 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly PHIL 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHIL 1002. Introduction to Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 100] An introduction to the basic problems of philosophy based upon readings in the
works of selected leading philosophers. Repeat credit for students who
have completed 1002W. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 1002W. Introduction to Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 100W] An
introduction to the basic problems of philosophy based upon readings
in the works of selected leading philosophers. Repeat credit for students
who have completed 1002. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 1003. General Logic. [Formerly PHIL 102] A study of the uses of
language, definition, informal fallacies, the theory of the syllogism, the basic operations of modern symbolic logic, and selected issues in inductive
logic and scientific method. Emphasis is placed on the ambiguities and
pitfalls of ordinary usage and on techniques for translating ordinary arguments into formal logic. [3] (MNS)
PHIL 1004. Introduction to Asian Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 103]
Philosophical thought of Asian origin, especially India and China, from
ancient times to the present, theoretical and practical concerns. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 1004W. [3] (INT)
PHIL 1004W. Introduction to Asian Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 103W]
Philosophical thought of Asian origin, especially India and China, from
ancient times to the present, theoretical and practical concerns. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 1004. [3] (INT)
PHIL 1005. Introduction to Ethics. [Formerly PHIL 105] A study of theories of the good life and of the nature of virtue. Readings in major texts and
discussion of selected problems. [3] (P)

vanderbilt university
PHIL 2100. Ancient Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 210] An examination of
the major Greek and Roman philosophers with emphasis on the works of
Plato and Aristotle. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 2101. Hellenistic and Late Ancient Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL
218] Philosophical ideas of Stoics, Cynics, Epicureans, skeptics, Peripatetics, Neoplatonists, and early monotheist thinkers such as Philo, Origen,
and Philoponus. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 2102. Medieval Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 211] Comparative
study of key figures in Islamic, Jewish, and Christian philosophy as they
struggle with the philosophy of logic, metaphysics, language, culture, politics, ethics, and nature. [3] (INT)
PHIL 2103. Modern Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 212] An examination
of the major philosophers of modern Europe from Descartes and Spinoza
through Locke, Berkeley, Hume, and Kant. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 2104. Nineteenth-Century Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 228] A
study of selected themes and writings from nineteenth-century European
philosophers. [3] (INT)
PHIL 2109. Twentieth-Century Continental Philosophy. [Formerly
PHIL 260] A study of selected twentieth-century philosophers such as
Derrida, Foucault, and Lacan. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 2110. Contemporary Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 213] An examination of selected problems treated in recent philosophical literature such
as meaning, perception, knowledge, truth, and freedom. Readings from
the Anglo American analytical and the phenomenological traditions. [3]
(HCA)
PHIL 2660. Philosophy of Music. [Formerly PHIL 249] Music and meaning, language, emotion, expression, interpretation, performance, the body,
and politics. No musical background is required. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 2661. Philosophy of Sport. Philosophical examination of sports,
athletics, games, and play. Fairness, competition, cheating, aesthetics,
embodiment, and doping. Role models, gender, exploitation, luck, and
sports ethics. [3] (P)

PHIL 1008. Introduction to Medical Ethics. [Formerly PHIL 108] Moral
issues in the practice of medicine, biomedical research, policies and regulations related to health care. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1008W. [3] (P)

PHIL 3003. Formal Logic and Its Applications. [Formerly PHIL 202] A
self-contained course designed to convey an understanding of the concepts of modern formal logic, to develop convenient techniques of formal reasoning, and to make some applications of them in one or more
of the following: psychology, linguistics, structuralist studies, information
and computer sciences, and the foundations of mathematics. Philosophy
1003 is not required. [3] (MNS)

PHIL 1008W. Introduction to Medical Ethics. [Formerly PHIL 108W]
Moral issues in the practice of medicine, biomedical research, policies and
regulations related to health care. Repeat credit for students who have
completed 1008. [3] (P)

PHIL 3004. Advanced Asian Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 203] Classical
Asian philosophical texts. Historical development of practices and ideas;
translation and interpretation issues; comparisons with European and
other traditions of thought. [3] (INT)

PHIL 1100. Introduction to Business Ethics. [Formerly PHIL 110]
Ethical issues arising from business and professional practice. Topics will
include: corporate social responsibility, employee rights, technology and
privacy in the workplace, corporate governance, and globalization. [3] (P)

PHIL 3005. Jewish Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 261] Introduction to
Jewish philosophy and the philosophical achievement of such major figures as Philo, Saadiah, Maimonides, Levinas, and selected contemporary
thinkers. [3] (HCA)

PHIL 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly PHIL 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

PHIL 3006. Islamic Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 262] Introduction to the
major figures of Islamic philosophy including Kindi, Razi, Farabi, Avicenna,
and Ibn Khaldun. [3] (INT)

PHIL 1200. The Meaning of Life. [Formerly PHIL 120] Accounts of life’s
meaning. The relations between ways of living, happiness, and the fact of
death. The individual’s role in giving meaning to life. Readings from Mill,
Tolstoy, Kierkegaard, and several contemporary thinkers. Repeat credit
for students who have completed 1200W. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 1200W. The Meaning of Life. [Formerly PHIL 120W] Accounts of
life’s meaning. The relations between ways of living, happiness, and the
fact of death. The individual’s role in giving meaning to life. Readings from
Mill, Tolstoy, Kierkegaard, and several contemporary thinkers. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 1200. [3] (HCA)

PHIL 3007. French Feminism. [Formerly PHIL 263] Introduction to the
tradition of French feminist philosophy, including relevant works by Beauvoir, Cixous, Irigaray, Kristeva, LeDoeuff, Kofmann, and others. [3] (No
AXLE credit)
PHIL 3008. American Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 222] A study of the
works of selected American philosophers from the colonial period to the
present. [3] (US)
PHIL 3009. Existential Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 224] A study of two
or three existential philosophers and selected problems that arise in relation to their thought. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3010. Phenomenology. [Formerly PHIL 226] Selected readings
from such thinkers as Husserl, Sartre, and Merleau-Ponty on the structures

College of Arts and Science / Courses
of experience, the sources and limits of knowledge, mind, and body, interpersonal relations, and the meaning of freedom. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3011. Critical Theory. [Formerly PHIL 232] The Frankfurt School;
mass culture, ideology, and modernism in the arts; the disenchantment of
reason; alienation and fascism; the prospects for experience and political
critique. Readings include Adorno, Horkheimer, Marcuse, Benjamin, and
Habermas. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3012W. Writing as Political Resistance. [Formerly PHIL 233W]
Writings from the political margins from authors under house arrest, in
exile, or in prison. Expressions of active resistance to oppressive, and occasionally violent, political institutions. [3] (P)
PHIL 3013. History of Aesthetics. [Formerly PHIL 240] History of philosophy of art, aesthetic experience, creativity, criticism, and related concepts. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3014. Modernistic Aesthetics. [Formerly PHIL 241] Abstraction,
nontraditional media, mixed media, new media, changes in artistic institutions, and the death of art. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3103. Immanuel Kant. [Formerly PHIL 220] Kant’s revolutionary
critique of the foundations of human knowledge, moral obligation, and
religious faith, with readings from his three Critiques and lesser works. [3]
(HCA)
PHIL 3104. Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. [Formerly PHIL 247] A study of
selected works. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3105. Hegel. Selected works and themes. Experience, reason,
freedom, history, and sociality. Modernity, dialectics, religion, and art. [3]
(HCA)
PHIL 3600. Philosophy of Knowledge. [Formerly PHIL 216] Nature,
sources, and scope of scientific, moral, and religious belief. Justification,
knowledge, and skeptical challenges to their legitimacy. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3601. Metaphysics. [Formerly PHIL 217] Selected problems in
metaphysics such as ultimate explanation, meaning of existence, time and
eternity, freedom and determinism, and science and religion. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3602. Philosophy of History. [Formerly PHIL 231] Focus on alternative conceptions of time and history in Aristotle, Augustine, Kant, Hegel,
Heidegger, and Benjamin. [3] (HCA)

199
PHIL 3609. Ethics and Business. [Formerly PHIL 271] Moral problems
in the business world including irresponsible marketing, conflict between
profit and social conscience, resource use, public regulation of business,
and the value of competition. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P)
PHIL 3610. Ethics and Law. [Formerly PHIL 272] Moral problems in the
practice of law including conflicts of interest, confidentiality, limits of advocacy, and the obligations of lawyers to clients, courts, and the public. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3610W. Prerequisite: 1005.
[3] (SBS)
PHIL 3610W. Ethics and Law. [Formerly PHIL 272W] Moral problems in
the practice of law including conflicts of interest, confidentiality, limits of
advocacy, and the obligations of lawyers to clients, courts, and the public.
Repeat credit for students who have completed 3610. Prerequisite: 1005.
[3] (SBS)
PHIL 3611. Environmental Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 273] Environmental ethics (animal rights, respect for nature, the land ethic), science
and the natural world, the aesthetics of nature, global justice, and sustainability. [3] (P)
PHIL 3612. Ethics and Animals. [Formerly PHIL 274] Ethical issues
raised by human interactions with animals, including laboratory experiments, factory farming, hunting, zoos, and pet ownership. Challenges to
ethical theory provoked by extending rights to animals. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3615. Philosophy of Film. [Formerly PHIL 243] Challenges posed
by film forms to traditional aesthetics and the novel philosophical approaches created to deal with them. Topics include the nature of the film
image, film and experiential time, cinematic genres, the problem of mass
art, and feminist critiques of spectatorship. Weekly screenings. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3616. Philosophy and the Natural Sciences. [Formerly PHIL 244]
Philosophical issues in the methodology, conceptual structure, patterns
of explanation, historical development, and cultural impact of the natural
sciences. Metaphysical and ethical implications. [3] (P)
PHIL 3617. Philosophy of Language. [Formerly PHIL 246] Philosophical
problems in the methodology of linguistics, relations between thought and
language, theories of meaning and symbolism, the nature of metaphor,
the philosophical implications of theories of language acquisition. [3] (SBS)

PHIL 3603. Philosophy of Education. [Formerly PHIL 234] Analysis of
educational concepts. Educational implications of theories of knowledge
and theories of the individual. Emphasis on higher education. [3] (HCA)

PHIL 3618. Philosophy and Literature. [Formerly PHIL 248] Philosophical topics in novels or poetry. Examples include: meaning of life, linguistic meaning, good and evil, aesthetic value, and human freedom. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 3618W. [3] (HCA)

PHIL 3604. Gender and Sexuality. [Formerly PHIL 235] Recent theories
of the relation between sex, gender, and sexuality. Construction of gendered identities, and their relation to embodiment, gender politics, ethics
and epistemology. [3] (P)

PHIL 3618W. Philosophy and Literature. [Formerly PHIL 248W] Philosophical topics in novels or poetry. Examples include: meaning of life,
linguistic meaning, good and evil, aesthetic value, and human freedom.
Repeat credit for students who have completed 3618. [3] (HCA)

PHIL 3605. Contemporary Ethical Theory. [Formerly PHIL 238] A study
of theories about the cognitive foundations of ethical discourses. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (HCA)

PHIL 3620. Political and Social Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 252] Central issues and arguments concerning individual liberty, political authority,
democracy, and justice. Key texts and arguments. Contemporary debates. [3] (P)

PHIL 3606. Moral Problems. [Formerly PHIL 239] A discussion of specific moral problems such as the justification of abortion and euthanasia.
Moral theories such as utilitarianism will be discussed, but the emphasis
will be on their relevance to the solution of moral problems. Repeat credit
for students who have completed 3606W. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P)
PHIL 3606W. Moral Problems. [Formerly PHIL 239W] A discussion of
specific moral problems such as the justification of abortion and euthanasia. Moral theories such as utilitarianism will be discussed, but the emphasis will be on their relevance to the solution of moral problems. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 3606. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P)
PHIL 3607. Philosophy of Religion. [Formerly PHIL 242] A study of various problems concerning religious experiences; ideas about religion and
divinity. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3608. Ethics and Medicine. [Formerly PHIL 270] Selected ethical issues raised by clinical practice, medical theories, and biomedical research and technology. No credit for students who have completed 1111,
section 3. Prerequisite: 1005, 1008, or 1008W. [3] (P)

PHIL 3621. Early Modern Political Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 257]
A study of competing accounts of the best form of political association,
which differ from Locke, through the works of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Spinoza, and Rousseau. [3] (INT)
PHIL 3622. Contemporary Political Philosophy. [Formerly PHIL 258]
A focused and extended examination of selected topics in contemporary
political theory, such as justice, liberty, rights, tolerance, and autonomy.
Content varies depending on instructor. [3] (P)
PHIL 3623. Modern Philosophies of Law. [Formerly PHIL 254] Contemporary theories of legal validity, legal liability (criminal and civil), and
contractual obligation with special attention to the controversy between
legal positivism and “natural law” theories and the assessment of contemporary economic analyses of legal rights. [3] (SBS)
PHIL 3630. Philosophy of Mind. [Formerly PHIL 256] Selected problems
in the philosophy of mind. Relation between mind and body, the nature of
consciousness, the problem of other minds, the status of self-knowledge,

A&S

200
and the possibility of machine and other intelligence. Connections with
empirical investigations in related cognitive disciplines. [3] (SBS)
PHIL 3657. Humanity, Evolution, and God. [Formerly PHIL 245] The
impact of the idea of evolution on our conception of personhood. Theistic
and non-theistic approaches to philosophical anthropology, ethics and society, the theory of knowledge, the mind-body problem, and relations with
the environment and other species. [3] (P)
PHIL 3661. Topics in Aesthetics. [Formerly PHIL 251] Philosophy of art
and aesthetic theory. [3] (HCA)
PHIL 3851. Independent Readings. [Formerly PHIL 289A] Designed for
majors not in the departmental honors program. Consists of a project to
be carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All
projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total
of 12 credits in3851 and 3852 combined over a four semester period if
there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits
per semester of enrollment. [1-6; maximum of 12 credits total for four
semesters of PHIL 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
PHIL 3852. Independent Readings. [Formerly PHIL 289B] Designed for
majors not in the departmental honors program. Consists of a project to
be carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All
projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total
of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined over a four semester period if
there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits
per semester of enrollment. [1-6; maximum of 12 credits total for four
semesters of PHIL 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
PHIL 3891. Selected Topics. [Formerly PHIL 294A] May be repeated
for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may
enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE
credit)
PHIL 3892. Selected Topics. [Formerly PHIL 294B] May be repeated
for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may
enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE
credit) (No AXLE credit)
PHIL 4999. Honors Independent Study. [Formerly PHIL 295] Designed
for students in the Honors Program in philosophy. Consists of guided
reading, periodic reports, and work on honors thesis. May be repeated
for credit once, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester
of enrollment. [3-6; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of PHIL
4999] (No AXLE credit)

Physics
PHYS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly PHYS 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 1010. Introductory Physics. [Formerly PHYS 110] Normally accompanied by 1010L. Motion, forces, conservation laws, light, heat, and
electricity. Quantum theory, the atomic nucleus, elementary particles, and
properties of materials. Special relativity, Big Bang, and cosmology. Primarily intended for those who do not expect to major in science. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 1050. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 1010L. Introductory Physics Laboratory. [Formerly PHYS 111]
Laboratory to accompany 1010. Corequisite: 1010. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1010. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly PHYS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
PHYS 1501. Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences I. [Formerly
PHYS 113A] Normally accompanied by 1501L. Calculus-based introduc-

vanderbilt university
tion to physics taught within the context of life science applications. Mechanics, fluids, sound, thermal, and statistical physics. Prospective majors
are strongly advised to take Math 1300 or a higher level calculus course.
Prior study of calculus or concurrent enrollment in Math 1100, 1200, or
1300 is expected. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1601
or 1901. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 1501L. Laboratory for Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences I. [Formerly PHYS 114A] Laboratory to accompany Physics 1501.
Normally accompanied by 1501. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1501 (strongly preferred) or 1601. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 1601L or 1901. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 1502. Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences II. [Formerly
PHYS 113B] Normally accompanied by 1502L. Calculus-based introduction to physics taught within the context of life science applications. Electricity and magnetism; geometric and physical optics; atomic, nuclear, and
quantum physics. Prospective majors are strongly advised to take Math
1301 or a higher level calculus course. Prior study of calculus or concurrent enrollment in Math 1100, 1201, or 1301 is expected. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 1602 or 1902. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 1502L. Laboratory for Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences II. [Formerly PHYS 114B] Laboratory to accompany Physics 1502.
Normally accompanied by 1502. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1502 (strongly preferred) or 1602. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 1602L or 1902. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 1601. General Physics I. [Formerly PHYS 116A] Normally accompanied by 118a. Calculus-based introduction to general physics and its
applications. Mechanics, heat, and sound. Potential majors are strongly
advised to take MATH 1300 or a higher level calculus course. Prior study
of calculus or concurrent enrollment in MATH 1200 or 1300 is expected.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 1501 or 1901. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 1601L. General Physics Laboratory I. [Formerly PHYS 118A]
Laboratory to accompany Physics 1601. Normally accompanied by 1601.
Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1601
(strongly preferred) or 1501. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 1501L or 1901. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 1602. General Physics II. [Formerly PHYS 116B] Normally accompanied by 1602L. Calculus-based introduction to general physics and
its applications. Electricity and magnetism, optics, modern physics. Potential majors are strongly advised to take MATH 1301 or a higher level
calculus course. Prior study of calculus or concurrent enrollment in MATH
1201 or 1301 is expected. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 1502 or 1902. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 1602L. General Physics Laboratory II. [Formerly PHYS 118B]
Laboratory to accompany Physics 1602. Normally accompanied by 1602.
Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1602
(strongly preferred) or 1502. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 1502L or 1902. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 1911. Principles of Physics I. Classical dynamics, conservation
laws, gravitation, wave motion, and thermodynamics. Designed for firstyear students who plan to major in physics or in related disciplines. Three
lectures and a weekly discussion on modern topics of interest. Students
who have earned credit for 1501, 1601, or 2051 will earn one hour of
credit for this course. No credit for students who have earned credit for
1901. Corequisite: MATH 1301. [4] (MNS)
PHYS 1912. Principles of Physics II. Continuation of 1911. Electromagnetism, optics, relativity, quantum mechanics, and atomic and nuclear
physics. Designed for first-year students who plan to major in physics or
in related disciplines. Three lectures and a weekly discussion on modern
topics of interest. Students who have earned credit for 1502, 1602, or
2053 will earn one hour of credit for this course. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 1902. Corequisite: MATH 2300 or 2500. [4] (MNS)
PHYS 1912L. Laboratory Skills for Physicists I. Fundamental laboratory skills and techniques. Experimental design, instrumentation, data
handling and analysis, documentation, presentation of results. Prerequisite: 1501, 1601, 1911, or 2051. Corequisite: 1502, 1602, 1912, or 2053.
[1] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
PHYS 2210. Classical and Modern Optics. [Formerly PHYS 221] Geometrical optics, including reflection, refraction, ray tracing, aberrations,
and interference. Physical optics, including wave theory, absorption, dispersion, diffraction, and polarization. Properties of light from lasers and
synchrotron sources. Photodetectors and optical technology. Prerequisite: either 1502 or 1602 or 1902; and either MATH 1201 or 1301. [3]
(MNS)
PHYS 2255. Modern Physics and the Quantum World. Relativity.
Experimental basis of quantum physics. Structure of the atom. Wave
properties of matter. The hydrogen atom. Atomic and statistical physics.
Three credit hours of repeat credit for students who have earned credit for
2250/2250W. Prerequisite: either 1502, 1602, 1902, or 2053. Corequisite:
MATH 2300 or 2500. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 2255L. Laboratory Skills for Physicists II. Fundamental laboratory skills and techniques. Experimental design, instrumentation, data
handling and analysis, documentation, presentation of results. Prerequisite: 1502, 1602, 1912, or 2053; and 1912L or one of 1501L or 1601L and
one of 1502L or 1602L. Corequisite: 2255 or 3651. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 2275. Classical Mechanics. Calculus of variations. Lagrangian
and Hamiltonian dynamics. Conservation laws. Vector algebra and coordinate transformations. Gravity and potential energy. Free, forced, damped,
and nonlinear harmonic oscillations. The anharmonic oscillator and chaos.
Orbital and rotational angular momentum. Gravitational and Coulomb
central-force problems. Motion in non-inertial reference frames. Coupled
oscillators and normal modes. Rigid-body motion. Continuous systems
and the wave equation. No credit for students who have earned credit for
2270 or 2271. Prerequisite: 2255 or 3651. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 2290. Electricity, Magnetism, and Electrodynamics I. [Formerly PHYS 229A] Electrostatic fields and potentials. Gauss’s law. Electrical
properties of insulators, semiconductors, and metals. The Lorentz force.
Magnetic fields and forces. Electromagnetic induction, Maxwell’s equations, and electromagnetic waves. Prerequisite: 2255 or 3651; and either
MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 2291. Electricity, Magnetism, and Electrodynamics II. [Formerly PHYS 229B] Electromagnetic waves in dielectrics and conductors.
Electromagnetic radiation in waveguide structures. Relativistic electrodynamics. Magnetism as a relativistic phenomenon. Prerequisite: 2290. [3]
(MNS)
PHYS 2660. Experimental Nanoscale Fabrication and Characterization. [Formerly PHYS 266] Laboratory course introduction to nanofabrication and characterization. Independent and original research in
nanotechnology and nanoscience. Nanomaterials, nanoelectronics, and
photonics. Prerequisite: One of 2255 or 3651, and one of 2260 or 2260W;
or one of 1501, 1601, 1901, or 2051, and one of CHEM 1602L or MSE
1500. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 2953L. Advanced Physics Laboratory: Introduction to Experimental Research. Fundamental physics experiments and measurements. Statistical analysis of measured data. One laboratory per week.
Prerequisite: 2255L, and either 2255 or 3651;or 1902 and either 2255 or
3651; or either 2250W or 2260W. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 3122. Physics of Living Systems. Physical principles applied
to biological phenomena. Development of physical models of biological
systems on scales ranging from molecules to organisms. Biological applications of mechanics, thermodynamics, and dynamical systems. Prerequisite: 1502, 1602, 1902, or 2053; and MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610.
[3] (MNS)
PHYS 3125. Health Physics. [Formerly PHYS 243] Theory and instrumentation in health physics and radiological physics. Radiation shielding
design, methods of external and internal dosimetry, and radiation regulatory issues. Prerequisite: 2255 and either Math 1201 or 1301. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 3200. Statistical Physics. [Formerly PHYS 223] Temperature,
work, heat, and the first law of thermodynamics. Entropy and the second
law of thermodynamics. Kinetic theory of gases with applications to ideal
gases and electromagnetic radiation. Serves as repeat credit for students
who have completed 3207. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2270 or 2275. [3]
(MNS)

201
PHYS 3600. Seminar in Presenting Physics Research. [Formerly
PHYS 250] Introduction, instruction, and practice in skills for presenting
scientific research results. May be repeated for credit once, but students
may earn only 1 credit per semester of enrollment and may count only 1
credit toward the major or minor in physics. Prerequisite: major or minor in
Physics; and 2255 or 3651. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 3640. Physics of Condensed Matter. [Formerly PHYS 254] Crystal structure and diffraction. Phonons and lattice vibrations. Free-electron
theory of metals. Elementary band theory of solids. Semiconductors. Optical properties of insulators. Applications to solid-state devices, magnetism, and superconductivity. Prerequisite: 2275 and 3200. Corequisite:
2255. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 3645. Radiation Detectors and Measurement. [Formerly PHYS
285] Basic physics principles and applications of radiation detecting instruments, with laboratory exercises. Techniques and instrumentation for
nuclear radiation detection and measurements as they relate to health
physics (radiation safety) and nuclear physics. Prerequisite: 2255 or 3125.
[4] (MNS)
PHYS 3651. Quantum Mechanics I. [Formerly PHYS 251A] Waveparticle duality, indeterminacy, superposition, the Schrödinger equation,
angular momentum, the hydrogen atom, and spin and indistinguishability. Prerequisite: 2255; and Mathematics: MATH 2400; or one of (MATH
2410, 2600, 2501) and one of (MATH 2420, 2610). [3] (MNS)
PHYS 3652. Quantum Mechanics II. [Formerly PHYS 251B] Time-independent and time-dependent perturbation theory, matrix theory, scattering, applications to atomic physics, condensed matter physics, and
astrophysics. Prerequisite: 2290 and 3651. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 3660. Introduction to Particle Physics. [Formerly PHYS 255]
Weak, strong, and electromagnetic forces as evidenced by the interactions of elementary particles. Classification of particles and experimental
techniques. Corequisite: 2255 or 3651. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 3790. Computational Physics. Topics in modern physics analyzed exclusively with computer programs. Finite difference approaches
to the Schrödinger and Maxwell equations. Solutions of nonlinear equations. Molecular dynamics. Monte Carlo simulations. Growth models and
random walks. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2237.
Prerequisite: Any three of 2255, 2275, 2290, 3200, 3651. [3] (MNS)
PHYS 3820. Methods in Physics Laboratory Teaching. Developing
and running physics labs and classroom lecture demonstrations. Understanding safety protocols. Enrollment open only to students who are Secondary Education, Elementary Education, or Education Studies majors,
are also either Physics majors or minors, and who have completed any 12
credit hours in satisfaction of requirements for major or minor in Physics.
[3] (MNS)
PHYS 3850. Undergraduate Research. Research and scholarly investigation or directed readings in physics under close supervision of sponsoring faculty member. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring faculty
member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for credit, for a total of no more than 10 total credit hours and for
no more than 5 credit hours per semester. [1-5] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 3851. Undergraduate Immersion Research. Research and
scholarly investigation or directed readings in physics under close supervision of sponsoring faculty member, including end-of-semester oral presentation or written report. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring
faculty member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be
repeated for credit, for a total of no more than 10 total credit hours and for
no more than 5 credit hours per semester. [1-5] (No AXLE credit)
PHYS 3890. Selected Topics. [Formerly PHYS 240] Prerequisite or
corequisite: either 2250 or 2250W and either 2260 or 2260W. [1-3] (No
AXLE credit)
PHYS 4005. Mathematical Methods for Physicists. Linear spaces
and operators; matrix algebra; differential equations; Green’s function;
and complex analysis. Variational calculus; perturbation methods; group
theory. Prerequisite: 2275, 2290; and one of MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610.
[3] (MNS)

A&S

202
PHYS 4998. Honors Research and Senior Thesis. [Formerly PHYS
296] Independent experimental or theoretical investigations of basic problems in physics under faculty supervision, culminating in a written thesis
submitted and an oral defense presented to a departmental faculty examination committee. Required for departmental honors in Physics. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring faculty member and approval
of director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 10
credits, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: major in Physics, junior or senior standing. [1-6] (No
AXLE credit)

Political Science
PSCI 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly PSCI 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 1100. Introduction to American Government and Politics. [Formerly PSCI 100] A descriptive survey of the constitutional and structural
principles, processes, and functions of the American governmental system. [3] (US)
PSCI 1101. Introduction to Comparative Politics. [Formerly PSCI 101]
Democracy, communism, and authoritarian rule in developed and developing countries; political institutions and public policy in diverse national
settings; principles of comparative analysis. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 1102. Introduction to International Politics. [Formerly PSCI 102]
Significant patterns and trends in twentieth-and twenty-first-century world
politics: modes of conducting relations among nations, instruments for
promoting national and supranational interests, and controls over international disputes. Emphasis upon episodes throwing light on the causes of
war and the conditions of peace. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 1103. Justice. [Formerly PSCI 103] Different understandings of and
debates concerning justice. Equality and freedom, individualism and community, diversity, patriotism, and representation. [3] (HCA)
PSCI 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly PSCI 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 115F course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
PSCI 1150. U.S. Elections. [Formerly PSCI 150] Examination of the
presidential and congressional elections. The recruitment of candidates,
nomination processes, financing campaigns, media coverage, polling,
predictive models, and implications of results. (during presidential election
years). [3] (US)
PSCI 2202. Ancient Political Thought. [Formerly PSCI 202] Greek and
Roman political traditions. Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and early Christian
thinkers. Questions of justice, equality, democracy, and political knowledge. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3]
(HCA)
PSCI 2203. History of Modern Political Philosophy. [Formerly PSCI
203] Intensive analysis of the principal political philosophers in the modern
tradition. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150.
[3] (HCA)
PSCI 2205. Contemporary Political Theory. [Formerly PSCI 205] Debates in contemporary political thought. Justice, democracy, freedom,
identity, and individualism. Includes emerging contemporary theories.
Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 201 before fall 2010.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)
PSCI 2207. Liberalism and Its Critics. [Formerly PSCI 207] The liberal tradition in political theory and its major challengers. Critical debates
surrounding the relationship between individuals and political community,
rights, freedom and equality. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2207W. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or
1150. [3] (HCA)

vanderbilt university
PSCI 2207W. Liberalism and Its Critics. [Formerly PSCI 207W] The
liberal tradition in political theory and its major challengers. Critical debates
surrounding the relationship between individuals and political community,
rights, freedom and equality. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2207. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150.
[3] (HCA)
PSCI 2208. Law, Politics, and Justice. [Formerly PSCI 208] Contemporary and classical theories of law and society: rights theories, gender and
the law; law and transitions to democracy; law between nations. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)
PSCI 2209. Issues in Political Theory. [Formerly PSCI 209] Topics vary
from semester to semester. May be repeated once if there is no overlap
with previous offerings. Prerequisite: 2202, 2203, or 2205. [3] (No AXLE
credit)
PSCI 2210. West European Politics. [Formerly PSCI 210] Analysis of
political development, social forces, institutions, and public policy in Great
Britain, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)
PSCI 2213. Democratization and Political Development. [Formerly
PSCI 213] Comparative study of political development, with a focus on
institutions. The effect of political choices about voting systems, executive
and legislative powers, cabinet formation, and other institutions on political competition, parties and government stability. Cases from established
democracies and countries undergoing democratization. No credit for
students who have taken 8317. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101,
1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2215. Change in Developing Countries. [Formerly PSCI 215]
Comparative study of political and economic change in developing countries. Political implications of ethnicity, economic dependency, and environmental degradation. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2216. The Chinese Political System. [Formerly PSCI 216] Governmental institutions and political processes in the People’s Republic of
China with emphasis upon the interaction of traditional and revolutionary
elements. Some attention to Taiwan since 1950 and to the overseas Chinese as parts of the Chinese political universe. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)
PSCI 2219. Politics of Mexico. [Formerly PSCI 219] A survey of contemporary Mexican politics from a comparative perspective. Interaction of
economic, social, and political forces that led to the demise of one of the
world’s most durable one-party political regimes and the prolonged transition to democracy. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103,
or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2220. Crisis Diplomacy. [Formerly PSCI 220] Foreign policy decision making and strategy. Emphasis on differences between crises that
lead to war and those that do not. Foreign relations of Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and Japan. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2221. Causes of War. [Formerly PSCI 221] Scientific study of
the onset of expansion and consequences of war; conditions of peace,
emphasizing alliances, arms races, and crisis escalation. Prerequisite or
corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2222. American Foreign Policy. [Formerly PSCI 222] Critical
analysis of major international and domestic factors shaping U.S. foreign
relations as reflected in selected twentieth- and twenty-first-century experiences. No credit for students who have taken 1111, Section 1. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2223. European Political Economy and Economic Institutions.
[Formerly PSCI 223] Policy-making processes of key economic institutions
that influence the global political economy. International and financial regulatory reforms. World Trade Organization negotiations and current European economic issues. No credit for students who earned credit for PSCI
285 section 1 in summer 2011. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101,
1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
PSCI 2225. International Political Economy. [Formerly PSCI 225] Survey of major issues involving the interaction of political and economic forces at the global level. Particular attention to theories of interdependence
and imperialism, the position of developing countries in the international
system, multinational corporations, and the economic origins of war. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2226. International Law and Organization. [Formerly PSCI 226]
The role of international law and international organizations in the contemporary global political system. Focus on the evolution and impact of international law, the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
and selected regional organizations. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100,
1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2230. Middle East Politics. [Formerly PSCI 230] Cross-national
analysis of political institutions, political economies, and processes of
change in the Middle East. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2236. The Politics of Global Inequality. [Formerly PSCI 236]
Causes of international inequality in the distribution of wealth. The emergence of rich and poor nations, and rich and poor people. Factors related
to economic development, and their impact on income distribution. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2237. African Politics. [Formerly PSCI 237] Pre-colonial to the
present. State-building, socioeconomic development, public service provision, and foreign interventions. Conflict including: separatism, insurgency,
slavery, genocide, and gender-based violence. Rise of democracy including party systems, voting behavior, electoral competition, fraud. Identity
politics of ethnicity, gender, class, and clash of Western and local norms.
Offered on a graded basis only. Repeat credit for 284-01 taken in Spring
2014. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100 {100}, 1101 {101}, 1102 {102},
1103 {103}, or 1150 {150}. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2240. Political Parties. [Formerly PSCI 240] Theories of party formation, organization, and behavior. Historical development of party systems. Criteria for the comparative evaluation of party systems. Parties as
instruments of citizen control. Implications for electoral outcomes, coalition formation, legislative decision making, and public policy. Prerequisite
or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2243. Political Campaigns and the Electoral Process. [Formerly
PSCI 243] Theories of representation and democratic accountability; electoral strategies and tactics, including political polling and analysis. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2245. The American Presidency. [Formerly PSCI 245] Constitutional, historical, and political aspects. Attention to electing and nominating president, presidential leadership and personality, governing, and
relations with Congress and the public. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100,
1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)
PSCI 2251. The Politics of U.S. and Global Immigration. [Formerly
PSCI 251] Political, philosophical, and moral issues. Serves as repeat
credit for students who completed 283 section 1 in spring 2009. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)
PSCI 2253. Public Administration. What administrative agencies do
and why. Effective management in the public sector, including public budgeting, implementation, personnel management, and communication with
the public and the press. No credit for students who have earned credit for
3893-03 offered spring 2017, 3893-01 offered fall 2015, or 283-04 offered
spring 2015. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2255. Public Policy Problems. [Formerly PSCI 255] Specific problems of public policies and their relations to political and institutional structures. Particular policy problems vary from semester to semester. May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.
Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No
AXLE credit)
PSCI 2256. Politics of Public Policy. [Formerly PSCI 256] Understanding and navigating the policy process. Public opinion, media, elections,
interest groups, and agenda settings. Legislatures, executives, decision-

203
making, implementation, and policy feedback. Current policy issues.
Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 255 in spring 2011.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2259. Political Strategy and Game Theory. [Formerly PSCI 259]
Campaigns and elections, legislative politics, political bargaining, and political organization. Applications of decision and game theory. Models of
complete and perfect information, and games of incomplete information.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 359. Prerequisite or
corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2262. The Judicial Process. [Formerly PSCI 262] Functioning of
the judiciary in the American political process; operation and powers of the
courts; non-legal aspects of the judicial process; political role and effects
of judicial decisions. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103,
or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2263. Religion and Politics. [Formerly PSCI 263] Religion in democratic societies. Abortion, gay marriage, faith-based initiatives, and the
Pledge of Allegiance. Historical works and contemporary contributions to
debates. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150.
[3] (HCA)
PSCI 2265. Constitutional Law: Powers and Structures of Government. [Formerly PSCI 265] U.S. constitutional system and fundamental
principles of constitutional interpretation. Judicial development of principles of distribution and scope of governmental powers. Case method. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 261. Repeat credit for students who completed 261a prior to fall 2009. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)
PSCI 2266. Constitutional Law: Civil Liberties and Rights. [Formerly
PSCI 266] Supreme Court’s interpretation of the Bill of Rights and the
Fourteenth Amendment. Case method. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 261. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for
261b prior to fall 2009. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [3] (US)
PSCI 2267. Voting and Political Representation in America. [Formerly PSCI 267] The history of voting rights and the efficacy of representation
in the American political system. Political participation, voting rights, felony
disenfranchisement, redistricting, and alternative electoral systems. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)
PSCI 2270. Conducting Political Research. [Formerly PSCI 270] Research sources, designs, and methods used by political scientists. Locating and accessing data, the logic of causal inferences, and basic data
presentation and analysis. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2273. Conflict Management. [Formerly PSCI 273] Conflict management in international and domestic disputes. Negotiation, mediation,
adjudication, intervention, and peacekeeping. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2274. Nature of War. [Formerly PSCI 274] Warfare from ancient
to contemporary times. Western and non-Western perspectives. Views
from political science, philosophy, history, and official U.S. military doctrine. Interplay among international politics, military strategy, technology,
and psychology. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or
1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 2279. Logic of Politics. [Formerly PSCI 279] Rational choice analysis of politics. Individual and collective choice. Collective action, public
goods, and externalities. Prerequisite or corequisite: 100, 101, 102, 103,
or 150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3211. The European Union. [Formerly PSCI 211] Political and
economic integration. Origins, institutions, decision processes, policies,
achievements, and prospects of the European integration movement. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)
PSCI 3217. Latin American Politics. [Formerly PSCI 217] Cross-national analysis of political institutions, cultures, and processes of change
in Latin America. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or
1150. [3] (INT)

A&S

204
PSCI 3228. International Politics of Latin America. [Formerly PSCI
228] Examination of Latin America’s role in the international and interAmerican system. Special attention to the international response to revolutionary change in the area, and to the region’s major actors and their
changing relationship with the United States, with other major powers,
and with other actors such as multinational corporations and international
financial institutions. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103,
or 1150. [3] (INT)
PSCI 3229. Strategy and International Politics. [Formerly PSCI 229]
Strategic behavior and strategic choices arising from interactive decision
making within the context of international politics. General principles of
strategy. In-class experiments and game playing. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3235. Political Islam. [Formerly PSCI 235] Rise of political Islam.
Origins, goals, and practices of specific Islamic groups throughout the
Middle East. Global and local causes of Islamic political mobilization, and
the American response to that mobilization. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)
PSCI 3241. American Public Opinion and Voting Behavior. [Formerly
PSCI 241] The development and dynamics of political opinion and its effects on voting and public policy. Models of political behavior. Prerequisite
or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3244. The Legislative Process. [Formerly PSCI 244] Legislative
organization and processes in the U.S. Congress. Attention to parties,
elections, institutional structure, interest groups, and other branches of
government as they relate to the legislative process. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3247. American Political Culture. [Formerly PSCI 247] Content,
historical development, and political consequences of the American public’s deeply rooted values concerning how the political system ought to
work and the ends it ought to serve. Attention to regional variation. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)
PSCI 3249. American Public Opinion and American Politics. [Formerly PSCI 249] Origins and effects of public opinion on politics in the
United States. Influence of values, emotion, prejudice, and news information on individual political views. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101,
1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3250. Group Conflict and Cooperation in U.S. Politics. [Formerly PSCI 250] Psychological and institutional sources of division and
unity in American politics. Identity formation and change, explicit and implicit racial attitudes, and political tolerance. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3252. Business and Public Policy. [Formerly PSCI 252] Relationships among business, public policy, and political strategy in the United
States and other political systems. Lobbying and legislative politics, antitrust and regulation, intellectual property, international trade, and ethics and corporate social responsibility. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100,
1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3253. Ethics and Public Policy. [Formerly PSCI 253] Political and
moral values in assessing policy-making, public policies and processes,
and policy impacts. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103,
or 1150. [3] (HCA)
PSCI 3254. Political Psychology. [Formerly PSCI 254] Interface between
politics and the psychological processes of individuals and groups. Cognition, emotion, identity and intergroup relations, leadership, and extremism.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3258. Democratic Theory and Practice. [Formerly PSCI 258]
Theories of democratic institutions, practices, and values in historical and
contemporary political thought. Impact of popular participation on issues
of justice, equality, individual freedom, and political power. Prerequisite or
corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)
PSCI 3260. Introduction to American Law. [Formerly PSCI 260] Law
as a component of public policy and the political system; the elements
and rationale of private law. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

vanderbilt university
PSCI 3264W. Global Feminisms. [Formerly PSCI 264W] Global politics
through feminist perspectives. Interrelated systems of power. Race, gender, sexuality, colonialism, and imperialism. Health, genocide, and slavery.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)
PSCI 3268. American Health Policy. [Formerly PSCI 268] Structure
of the American health care system. Challenges to providing care and
improving health. Private and public insurance, inequality, cost growth,
quality of care, and reform. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 283 section 4 in spring 2011 or section 3 in fall 2011. Prerequisite
or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 3271. Feminist Theory and Research. [Formerly PSCI 271] Introduction to feminist works in the social sciences. Development of feminist
analysis. Important issues, feminist theories, and approaches to social
criticism. Methodological challenges to feminist research. Prerequisite or
corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (P)
PSCI 3272W. The War in Iraq, 2003-2011. [Formerly PSCI 272W] The
structure of and changes in the U.S. military. Development of Iraqi political
institutions. American foreign policy making. Serves as repeat credit for
students who completed 287 section 1 in fall 2010 or HUM 161 section 1
in fall 2009. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150.
[3] (US)
PSCI 3275. National Security. [Formerly PSCI 275] How states ensure
their national security. Origins of the security dilemma; the use of power,
deterrence, coercion, engagement, and interstate cooperation in settling
disputes. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150.
[3] (SBS)
PSCI 3841. Directed Study. [Formerly PSCI 291A] Participation in research projects under the direction of a faculty supervisor. Consent of
both the faculty supervisor and the director of undergraduate studies is
required. Open only to junior and senior majors. May be repeated for a
total of 6 credits in 290a, 290b, 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if
there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3842. Directed Study. [Formerly PSCI 291B] Participation in research projects under the direction of a faculty supervisor. Consent of
both the faculty supervisor and the director of undergraduate studies is
required. Open only to junior and senior majors. May be repeated for a
total of 6 credits in 290a, 290b, 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if
there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102,
1103, or 1150. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of PSCI
290a, 290b, 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3851. Independent Research. [Formerly PSCI 289A] Development of a research project by the individual student under direction of a
faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of
undergraduate studies is required. Normally open only to majors in political science. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 290a, 290b, 3841,
3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but
students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3; maximum
of 6 credits total for all semesters of PSCI 290a, 290b, 3841, 3842, 3851,
and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3852. Independent Research. [Formerly PSCI 289B] Development of a research project by the individual student under direction of a
faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of
undergraduate studies is required. Normally open only to majors in political science. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 290a, 290b, 3841,
3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but
students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3; maximum
of 6 credits total for all semesters of PSCI 290a, 290b, 3841, 3842, 3851,
and 3852] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly PSCI 280A] Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline gain experience with local, state,
national, and international government offices or other politically related

College of Arts and Science / Courses
organizations. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the
end of the semester. Completion of 6 hours of political science, normally a
2.90 grade point average, and prior department approval of the student’s
plan are required. May be taken on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3882 and/or 3883. These hours may not be included
in the minimum hours required in the political science major. Corequisite:
3882 and/or 3883. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3882. Internship Readings. [Formerly PSCI 280C] Under faculty
supervision, students from any discipline gain experience with local, state,
national, and international government offices or other politically related
organizations. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the
end of the semester. Completion of 6 hours of political science, normally a
2.90 grade point average, and prior department approval of the student’s
plan are required. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3883. Internship Research. [Formerly PSCI 280B] Under faculty
supervision, students from any discipline gain experience with local, state,
national, and international government offices or other politically related
organizations. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the
end of the semester. Completion of 6 hours of political science, normally a
2.90 grade point average, and prior department approval of the student’s
plan are required. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)

205
PSCI 4998. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly PSCI 299A] Open only
to seniors in the departmental honors program. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 4999. Senior Honors Research. [Formerly PSCI 299B] Open only
to seniors in the departmental honors program. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Portuguese
PORT 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly PORT 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PORT 1103. Intensive Elementary Portuguese. [Formerly PORT 102]
Accelerated introduction to reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Emphasis on practical usage. Intended for students with prior or current study
of another Romance language. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 1101, 1102, or a higher level Portuguese language course. [3]
(INT)

PSCI 3891. Topics in Contemporary Politics. [Formerly PSCI 281] Political, governmental, and policy issues. May be repeated for credit when
topics vary. No more than three hours may be counted toward the major.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3] (No
AXLE credit)

PORT 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly PORT 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)

PSCI 3893. Selected Topics in American Government. [Formerly
PSCI 283] Topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more
than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite:
1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PORT 2203. Intermediate Portuguese. [Formerly PORT 200] Review of
Portuguese grammar with emphasis on conversation, composition, and
reading of modern Portuguese literary texts. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a higher level Portuguese language course. Prerequisite: 1103. [3] (INT)

PSCI 3894. Selected Topics in Comparative Politics. [Formerly PSCI
284] Topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once
if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one
section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100,
1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PORT 2900. Brazilian Civilization through English Language Material. [Formerly PORT 291] The cultural heritage of Brazil from its earliest
days to the present. National identity, race relations, and Brazil’s emergence as a major force in the Americas and beyond. Taught in English.
No credit for graduate students in Spanish and Portuguese. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 1111 section 1. [3] (P)

PSCI 3895. Selected Topics in International Politics. [Formerly PSCI
285] Topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once
if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one
section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100,
1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3896. Selected Topics in Political Theory. [Formerly PSCI 286]
Topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if
there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101,
1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 3897. Selected Topics. [Formerly PSCI 287] Topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. No more than a total of 6 credits may be earned for 3897 and
3898 combined. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or
1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSCI 4238. Comparative Political Parties. [Formerly PSCI 238] Political parties and their role in the democratic process of modern liberal
western democracies, focusing on party systems and party organizations.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)
PSCI 4257. The Politics of Capitalism. [Formerly PSCI 257] Commerce
and capitalism in social and political life from the eighteenth century to the
present. Questions of justice and equality, freedom, and democratic politics. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 207 in fall 2009.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)
PSCI 4277. Future of Warfare. [Formerly PSCI 277] Political, societal,
and technological factors that could affect the future conduct of warfare.
Insurgency and counterinsurgency. Military operations other than war.
Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PORT 3301. Portuguese Composition and Conversation. [Formerly
PORT 201] Expository writing and development of speaking skills. Emphasis on pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar. No credit for students
who have earned credit 202. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (INT)
PORT 3302. Brazilian Pop Culture. [Formerly PORT 203] Development
of written and oral communication skills through the study of Brazilian
popular culture. Movies, music, television, and magazines. Prerequisite:
2203. [3] (INT)
PORT 3303. Introduction to Luso-Brazilian Literature. [Formerly
PORT 205] Critical readings and methods of literary analysis. Masterpieces from Portugal and Brazil from all genres in several periods. Conversation and writing. Prerequisite: 3301 or 3302. [3] (HCA)
PORT 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly PORT 289] A reading course,
the content of which varies according to the needs of the individual student. Primarily designed to cover pertinent material not otherwise available
to the student in the regular courses of the curriculum. [Variable credit:
1-3 hours, not to exceed 12 over a four-semester period] (No AXLE credit)
PORT 3891. Special Topics in Portuguese and Brazilian Literature
or Civilization in English Translation. [Formerly PORT 295] Does not
count toward a major or minor in Portuguese. May be repeated for credit
more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in
more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PORT 3892. Special Topics in Portuguese Language, Literature, or
Civilization. [Formerly PORT 294] May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (No AXLE
credit)

A&S

206
PORT 4350. Brazilian Culture through Native Material. [Formerly
PORT 225] Differences between spoken and written Portuguese in Brazil. Modern culture, including popular music, film, politics, family life, and
sports. Prerequisite: 3301 or 3302. [3] (P)
PORT 4420. Brazilian Literature through the Nineteenth Century.
[Formerly PORT 232] Main literary trends, principal writers and works of
Brazilian literature, from colonial beginnings through the nineteenth century. Study of the works of Gregório de Matos, Gonçalves Dias, Alencar,
Machado de Assis, and Euclides da Cunha. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
PORT 4425. Modern Brazilian Literature. [Formerly PORT 233] Brazilian literature from the Semana de Arte Moderna to the present. Modernist
and neo-Modernist movements. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

Psychology
PSY 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly PSY 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly PSY 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
PSY 1200. General Psychology. [Formerly PSY 101] A survey of modern scientific psychology. Topics include development, perception, motivation, learning, thinking, remembering, emotion, intelligence, special
aptitudes, and personality development. General applications to human
behavior. The student must either analyze published research or be a subject in current research. No credit for students who have earned credit for
1111 sections 1, 2, or 3. [3] (SBS)
PSY 2100. Quantitative Methods. [Formerly PSY 209] Principles and
methods for the statistical analysis of experiments, with emphasis on applications in psychology. Descriptive and inferential statistics. Prerequisite:
1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child
Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)
PSY 2150. Principles of Experimental Design. [Formerly PSY 208]
Theory and research methods in psychological science. Philosophy of science, ethical issues, experimental design, and data interpretation. Prerequisite: 2100 or PSY-PC 2110. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3100. Abnormal Psychology. [Formerly PSY 215] Mental and emotional disorders. Definitions of adequate human functioning processes that
disrupt functioning. Methods of evaluation and treatment. Prerequisite:
1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child
Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3110. Social Psychology. [Formerly PSY 231] The influence of social conditions upon behavior in interpersonal and group relations. Perception, judgment, learning, and attitudes. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or
3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive
Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3120. Cognitive Psychology. [Formerly PSY 225] Attention, pattern
recognition, knowledge representation, language, reasoning, and human
intelligence. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in
Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3600. Personality. [Formerly PSY 211] Major theories of personality development, methods of assessment, and results of research, with
an emphasis on normal behavior. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or
1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3605. Industrial and Organizational Psychology. [Formerly PSY
239] Scientific theories in cognitive, social, and personality psychology to
improve work motivation and performance. Job analysis and assessment
methods. Leadership, teamwork, and cross-cultural issues. Prerequisite:

vanderbilt university
1111 section 1, 2, or 3, or 1200; or a major in Cognitive Studies, Child
Development, or Child Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3610. Introduction to Clinical Psychology. [Formerly PSY 244]
Historical foundations, professional ethics, principles of clinical assessment and therapy, and areas of specialization such as health psychology.
Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3615. Emotion. [Formerly PSY 245] Definitions and functions of
emotion. Emotion and health, emotion and psychopathology, individual
differences, and emotional development. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2,
or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive
Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3620. Schizophrenia. [Formerly PSY 246] Neurological, psychological, cultural, and evolutionary perspectives. Genetics, epidemiology,
symptomatology, sex differences, and affect. Prerequisite: 3100 and NSC
2201. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3625. Depression. [Formerly PSY 247] Psychological and biological
perspectives on unipolar and bipolar affective disorders. Assessment and
classification, epidemiology, genetics, family environment, and treatments.
Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3630. Drugs and Behavior. [Formerly PSY 261] Drug effects on
neural circuits, human physiology, individual psychology, and society. No
credit for students who have earned credit for NSC 3260. Prerequisite:
1200 or NSC 2201. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3635. Health Psychology. [Formerly PSY 268] Neurophysiological,
endocrine, and immune systems. Factors underlying health habits and lifestyles. Methods to enhance health behaviors and prevent illness. Stress
management. Reciprocal interactions among behavior, thoughts, and
physiology with resulting effects on physical and psychological health and
illness. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child
Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3640. Positive Psychology. [Formerly PSY 270] Optimal functioning in human psychology. Interdisciplinary approaches to well being, character strengths and virtues, positive emotions, and clinical implications.
No credit for students who have earned credit for PSY 1111 section 13.
Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3700. Movement. [Formerly PSY 216] Psychological, computational, and neural perspectives on the activities of looking, reaching, grasping,
speaking, smiling or frowning, walking and running. Prerequisite: 1111
section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies,
or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)
PSY 3705. Human Sexuality. [Formerly PSY 252] The physiological,
psychological, and cultural bases of sexual behavior. History of sexuality,
gender roles, sex in human relationships, diagnosis and treatment of sexual disorders and dysfunctions, cross-cultural perspectives, pornography,
rape, AIDS, and homosexuality. [3] (P)
PSY 3715. Animal Behavior and Evolutionary Psychology. [Formerly
PSY 258] Comparative and phylogenetic approach to the study of behavior, with special emphasis on sensory processes, instinctive behavior,
the genetics of behavior, and ethology. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or
3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive
Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3750. Perception. [Formerly PSY 214] Current theory and research
in sensation and perception, including an analysis of philosophical and
biological issues. Biological organisms’ acquisition, processing, and use
of information about objects and events in the environment. Vision, audition, taste, smell, and touch. Prerequisite: NSC 2201 and either PSY 1111
section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies,
or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)
PSY 3755. Behavioral Decision-making. [Formerly PSY 226] Affective,
cognitive, and motivational processes involved in human judgment and
decision-making. Accurate and inaccurate judgments. Optimal and suboptimal decisions. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisites: 1111

College of Arts and Science / Courses

207

section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies,
or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)

topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. Prerequisite: 3110. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY 3760. Mind and Brain. [Formerly PSY 232] Concepts of cognitive
neuroscience. Relationship between the brain and perception, cognition,
attention, memory, language, thought, emotion, social judgments, and
consciousness. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in
Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)

PSY 3980. Honors Seminar. [Formerly PSY 295A] Individual readings,
reports, and seminar discussions of the basic areas of psychology. Selection of topics will provide some freedom to pursue individual interests.
Open only to departmental honors candidates. Prerequisite: 1111 section
1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or
Cognitive Studies. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY 3765. Social Cognition and Neuroscience. [Formerly PSY 238]
Neural underpinnings of social perceptions, evaluations, and decisions.
Face perception, attraction and reward processing, social co-operation
and competition, decision-making, and moral judgments. Offered on a
graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a
major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)
PSY 3775. Human Memory. [Formerly PSY 253] Single- and dual-process models of recognition memory; context and the role of time in memory search; interference versus decay in theories of forgetting. Theories
of association, memory for sequences, and memory disorders. [3] (MNS)
PSY 3780. The Visual System. [Formerly PSY 236] Interdisciplinary approach to the ways that humans see and interpret their visual environment.
Structure of the eye and brain, including optics. Physiology of individual
cells and groups of cells. Machine vision and models of visual function,
visual attention, and mechanisms of complex visual perception. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development,
Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)
PSY 3785. Brain Damage and Cognition. [Formerly PSY 277] Effects
of neurological impairment from stroke, injury, or disease on perception,
speech, memory, judgment, and behavior. Relationship between brain systems and cognitive systems. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200;
or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3]
(SBS)
PSY 3840. Directed Study. [Formerly PSY 290] Participation in ongoing
research projects under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both
the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required.
Open only to juniors and seniors. May be repeated for credit more than
once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or
3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive
Studies. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly PSY 293] Development of a
project by the individual student under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies
is required. Open only to juniors and seniors. May be repeated for credit
more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn
only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or
Cognitive Studies. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 3890. Special Topics in Perception. [Formerly PSY 280] May be
repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
Prerequisite: 3750. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 3891. Special Topics in Cognitive Psychology. [Formerly PSY
282] May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication
in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. Prerequisite: 3120. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 3892. Special Topics in Neuroscience. [Formerly PSY 285] May
be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.
Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: NSC 2201. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 3893. Special Topics in Clinical Psychology. [Formerly PSY 288]
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in
topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. Prerequisite: 3100. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 3894. Special Topics in Social Psychology. [Formerly PSY 289]
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in

PSY 3981. Honors Seminar. [Formerly PSY 295B] Individual readings,
reports, and seminar discussions of the basic areas of psychology. Selection of topics will provide some freedom to pursue individual interests.
Open only to departmental honors candidates. Prerequisite: 1111 section
1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or
Cognitive Studies. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 4720. Experimental Methods in Behavioral Neuroscience.
[Formerly PSY 234] Experimental methods in behavioral neuroscience.
Computer-based data acquisition and analysis, statistical reasoning, and
manuscript preparation. Prerequisite: 1200 and NSC 2201. [3] (MNS)
PSY 4998. Honors Thesis. [Formerly PSY 296A] Participation with a staff
member in work leading toward the senior thesis. This work may consist
of readings and reports or active participation in research and will culminate in an independent research report. Open only to departmental honors
candidates. Prerequisite: 3980 or 3981. [3] (No AXLE credit)
PSY 4999. Honors Thesis. [Formerly PSY 296B] Participation with a staff
member in work leading toward the senior thesis. This work may consist
of readings and reports or active participation in research and will culminate in an independent research report. Open only to departmental honors
candidates. Prerequisite: 3980 or 3981. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Public Policy Studies
PPS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly PPS 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
PPS 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly PPS 294] Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.
[3] (No AXLE credit)
PPS 4960. Senior Seminar on Research in Public Policy. [Formerly
PPS 295] Supervised research project in policy area incorporating methodologies and analytical insights from more than one discipline. Offered on
a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)

Religious Studies
RLST 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly RLST 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
RLST 1010. Encountering Religious Diversity. [Formerly RLST 101]
Essential beliefs and practices of the world’s major religious traditions.
Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Contemporary
scholarship and perspectives on religious encounters from each of these
traditions. [3] (HCA)
RLST 1100. Introduction to African American Religious Traditions.
[Formerly RLST 107] Historical survey of the leadership, dynamics, and
cultural milieu of African American religious traditions. Institutional expressions and theologies from the colonial period to the present. [3] (US)
RLST 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly RLST 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)

A&S

208
RLST 1190W. Introduction to Southern Religion and Culture. [Formerly RLST 110W] An exploration of the histories of evangelical and nonevangelical expressions in Southern religious culture from the colonial period to the present. The evangelical thrust of Southern culture, with some
attention to Catholicism, Judaism, and other religious modes considered
outside the mainstream of that culture. [3] (SBS)
RLST 1200. Introduction to Judaism. [Formerly RLST 112] Comprehensive historical overview of Judaism as a religion and a culture. The main
ideas and institutions of Judaism, the centrality of the Hebrew Bible and
the meaning of interpretation, thinkers, and movements in Jewish civilization, from rabbinic Judaism, medieval philosophy, mysticism, to modern
thought, Zionism, and the foundation of the State of Israel. Recent Jewish
self-representation in art. [3] (HCA)
RLST 1208. Themes in the Hebrew Bible. [Formerly RLST 108] A
thematic introduction to the Hebrew Scripture/Old Testament. Selected
themes—such as creation, revelation, covenant, law, suffering, messianic expectation—are traced through the diverse parts of the Bible (Pentateuch, Prophetic Writings, and Wisdom Literature) as well as in early
Jewish texts. The comparison of the various expressions of these themes
shows both the distinctiveness of each document and the continuity of the
Biblical faith through the centuries. [3] (HCA)
RLST 1309. Themes in the New Testament. [Formerly RLST 109] A
comparative study of New Testament documents following central themes
such as salvation; evil and sin; the roles of Christ, God, and the Spirit; discipleship; the church; sacred history. The distinctive teaching of each New
Testament document as related to a concrete historical setting. Comparison with similar themes in Jewish and Hellenistic texts of that period. [3]
(HCA)
RLST 1330W. The Gnostic Gospels. [Formerly RLST 111W] Gnostic
writings of the 2nd-4th centuries; relationship to other early Christian writings; modern views of Gnosticism. [3] (HCA)
RLST 1500. Introduction to Islam. [Formerly RLST 113] An historical overview of the different religious traditions in Islam, their basis in the
Qur’an and life of the Prophet, their proliferation in the medieval period,
and their response to the challenge of modernity. Topics include sunni and
shi’i Islam, evolution of law and theology, sufism and political philosophy.
Islam in Africa, India, Spain, and southeast Asia as well as the Middle East.
[3] (HCA)
RLST 1637. Religions of Tibet and the Himalaya. [Formerly RLST 137]
Sixth century CE to the present. Religious ideas and practices. Myth, cosmology, doctrine, pilgrimage, and ritual. Adaptation of religious tradition
to changing historical and cultural contexts. Encounters among Tibetan
Buddhism, Bön, Catholicism, and modernity. [3] (INT)
RLST 1700. Religions in China. [Formerly RLST 135] Major religious
traditions of China. Taoism, Buddhism, Confucianism, state-sponsored
religious systems, and popular religion. Thought and practice from ancient
times to the present. [3] (INT)
RLST 1710. Religions of Japan. [Formerly RLST 136] Early myths to
present-day practices. Buddhism, Shinto, Shugendo, Christianity, and
new religious movements. Cosmology, ritual, death, and modernity. Thematic explorations through film. [3] (INT)
RLST 1820. Religion, Sexuality, Power. [Formerly RLST 120] Historical, cultural, social scientific, and philosophical theories of how religious
and political ideas and institutions are related to and dependent upon assumptions and ideologies of sex, gender, and race. Politics and public
discourse on sex and religion. [3] (SBS)
RLST 2210W. Constructions of Jewish Identity in the Modern
World. [Formerly RLST 220W] How Jewish thinkers at the end of the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries addressed the question of individual and collective identity. Cultural, political, and religious definitions of
modern Jewish identity, the role and the reinvention of national myths; the
“Jewry of muscles,” the “New Hebrews,” the Zionist myth narratives in
Zionism. [3] (HCA)
RLST 2220. Jewish Ethics. [Formerly RLST 222] A study of the logic
and basic values that, in the Jewish tradition, guide thinking about moral

vanderbilt university
problems. Examination of family and social ethical issues found in Talmud
and other Jewish classical texts. Basic religious views of modern Jewish
thinkers and their relation to contemporary Jewish life. Offered alternately
with 1200. [3] (HCA)
RLST 2250W. History of the Bible. Jewish and Christian Bibles from the
formation of earliest bibles to the present. Major forms of the Bible, major
interpretive approaches, and impact on politics and culture. [3] (HCA)
RLST 2310. Interpreting the Gospels. [Formerly RLST 210] The Synoptic Gospels through history and culture. Focus on either Matthew, Mark,
or Luke; a survey of the interpretations of the Gospel from its original historical context, through the history of the church, and more recently in
Catholic and Protestant churches after the Holocaust, in African American
churches, and in feminist circles. [3] (HCA)
RLST 2315. Christian Theologies. Ancient, modern and contemporary
debates in theology. Ideas of God, Jesus, Spirit, salvation, evil, and liberation. Key questions of science, belief, theism, race, gender, and colonial
impact of Christian ideas. St. Paul, Augustine, Calvin, Tillich, Gutierrez,
Cone, Daly, and Althaus-Reid. [3] (HCA)
RLST 2461. Islam in Africa. [Formerly RLST 261] Social and cultural
development of Islam across Africa from the eighth century to the present,
as illuminated by historical, ethnographic, and literary sources. Interplay
between Muslims and outside religious groups, jihads in pre-colonial Africa, and Islam during European colonization. Attention to Sub-Saharan
Africa. [3] (INT)
RLST 2471. Religion in Africa. [Formerly RLST 171] Indigenous religious forms from pre-colonial Africa to the present. Creation myths, notions about gods and spirits, ritual, magic, witchcraft, art, shamanism, and
ancestry. Interplay of indigenous religions with Islam and Christianity. No
credit for students who earned credit for 294 section 2 in fall 2013. [3] (INT)
RLST 2472. Religion, Ecology, and Power in Africa. [Formerly RLST
272] The interrelationship between religion and ecology in Africa; the ways
power relations in pre-colonial Africa through the present have determined
human-Earth relations. Divine origin and development of the Earth and its
peoples; influence on African social structure, ethnically-based occupations, and stewardship over the environment. [3] (INT)
RLST 2644. Buddhist Traditions. [Formerly RLST 244] Historical and
thematic survey of foundational, Mahayana, and esoteric Buddhist traditions. Mythology, doctrine, meditation, devotional practices, and institutions of early and medieval South Asia. Contemporary case studies from
Asia and North America. [3] (INT)
RLST 2664. Foundations of Hindu Traditions. [Formerly RLST 264]
Hindu cosmology and the ritual structure of sacrifice. The effect of the law
of cause and effect (karma) on the moral order of the universe (dharma).
The emergence of bhakti devotion to key gods and goddesses. The escape from the cycle of lives through yoga, introspection, and devotion. Pilgrimage mapping and the sacred geography of ancient and modern India.
Classical mythology of the Vedas, Epics, and Puranas. [3] (INT)
RLST 2811. Natural Science and the Religious Life. How scientific
discoveries and religious teachings are related. Descriptions of the physical universe from Aristotle through Albert Einstein are compared to contemporaneous definitions of the moral life by religious thinkers such as
Thomas Aquinas, Martin Luther, Immanuel Kant, and Martin Buber. [3] (P)
RLST 2881. Myth and History in Religious Biography. [Formerly RLST
181] Religious biography and hagiography as distinct literary genres. Hero
mythology and narrative patterning. Ways religions construct unique biographical images by combining the historical life with religious belief. Examples from lives of Jesus, Buddha, Muhammad, Luther, Caitanya, Shinran, and Mama Lola. Interpretive strategies include hermeneutic theory,
modes of history, structuralism, and feminism; additional theoretical perspectives on translation, orality, and reader response criticism. [3] (HCA)
RLST 2940. Great Books of Literature and Religion. [Formerly RLST
140] “Great Books” of the Western intellectual tradition, tracing GrecoRoman and Judeo-Christian literature and culture from their origins to synthesis in the medieval period. [3] (HCA)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
RLST 3079. The Sacred and the Secular. [Formerly RLST 279] Ethnographies of ritual and religious life. Politics of secularism and religious
revival. Issues in anthropology, literature, and philosophy. Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, and Native American Religions. [3] (P)
RLST 3119. Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Social Roles of Religion.
[Formerly RLST 219] King as religious leader and agent of social change.
His views of the social roles of religion seen against the background of late
nineteenth-century dissenting traditions and the early twentieth-century
social gospel movement in America. Critical evaluations in terms of classical Christian views (e.g., Aquinas, Luther, Calvin, Wesley). [3] (US)
RLST 3142. Slave Thought and Culture in the American South. [Formerly RLST 242] The religious thought of African American slaves as expressed through folklore, literature, and art. Creative ideas about the cosmos, the supernatural, transcendent spiritual reality, natural social reality,
and the human condition. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)
RLST 3178. Native American Religious Traditions. [Formerly RLST
278] Diversity of First Nation religious traditions in North America, especially Eastern Woodlands and Plains. Spiritual and cultural dimensions of
diversity, cosmologies, stereotypes, cultural resilience, creativity and storytelling, humor, rituals and practices, healing, and sovereignty. [3] (HCA)

209
and reflect upon questions of continuing historical interest that have come
out of the Reformation. [3] (HCA)
RLST 3350. Christian-Jewish Relations in Medieval and Early Modern Europe. Political and cultural history from the medieval persecutions
to the expansion of religious toleration in the Enlightenment. Close consideration of legal toleration, banishments, re-admissions, and the impact of
Christian reform movements. [3] (INT)
RLST 3380. History Christian Tradition. [Formerly RLST 180] Christian
traditions from the origins to the present. Such themes as Christology,
church and state, and the social and cultural contents of changing Christian beliefs, and views of the Church. [3] (HCA)
RLST 3561. Islam in South Asia. History of Islam in South Asia. Cultural
memory of conquest. Inter-religious interactions. Sufism and Bhakti. Mughal traditions of cosmopolitanism. Legacy of colonialism. Impact of Partition. Shared popular culture and shared sacred spaces. [3] (INT)
RLST 3650. Classical Philosophies of India. [Formerly RLST 250]
Hindu and Buddhist traditions. The six “mainstream” schools (darsana)
of Hindu thought and their interaction with Buddhist philosophy in ancient
India. [3] (INT)

RLST 3225. Sexuality in the Hebrew Bible and the Ancient Near
East. [Formerly RLST 225] Issues of sexuality in the Hebrew Bible in the
context of the Ancient Near East. Homosexuality, virginity, and incest. [3]
(HCA)

RLST 3669. Sacred Space in the Tibetan World. [Formerly RLST 269]
Creation, mediation, and reproduction of sacred space from artifacts to
built structures to geographies. Narrative, ritual, and cosmological aspects
of Tibetan Buddhist, Bön, and local religious traditions. Cases include premodern to modern periods, and local to global contexts. [3] (INT)

RLST 3229. The Holocaust: Its Meanings and Implications. [Formerly
RLST 229] Interdisciplinary study of the systematic destruction of European Jewish communities during WWII. Historical, social, political, cultural
developments that led to it. Psychological and sociological dimensions
of its aftermath. Philosophical and theological problems it raises for both
Jews and Christians. No credit for students who earned credit for JS 156
in fall 2013. [3] (P)

RLST 3670W. Buddhism and the State. [Formerly RLST 270W] Models
relating Buddhism and the state in ancient and modern Asia. Kingship
and spiritual leadership; sacred territory and national identity; legitimation
theory and its alternatives; and religious responses to the modern state.
Case studies from India, Nepal, Thailand, Burma, Tibet, Mongolia, China,
and Japan. [3] (INT)

RLST 3270. Jewish Theories of Religion. [Formerly RLST 203] Critical analysis and discussion of modern Jewish constructions of religion:
politically, symbolically, ethically, normatively, and aesthetic-mystically.
Selected readings from Cohen, Buber, Rosenzweig, Kaplan, and social
philosophers such as Simmel and Habermas on the function, nature, and
meaning of religion in secular culture. [3] (P)
RLST 3304W. Evangelical Protestantism and the Culture Wars.
[Formerly RLST 204W] Evangelical traditions from the reformation to their
present manifestations in twentieth-century America. Debates concerning
the authority of the scripture, the person of Jesus Christ, evangelism, and
soul-winning mission, revivalism and social reform, church-state relations,
the relationship between science and religion, Biblical vs. “New” morality,
and other areas of cultural cleavage. [3] (US)
RLST 3306. Global Interpretations of Christian Scriptures. [Formerly
RLST 206] Comparative interpretations of Biblical texts by Christians in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Oceania - with those by Orthodox Christians
in Eastern Europe and the Middle East, and by Catholics and Protestants
in Western Europe and North America. The role of culture in each type of
biblical interpretation. [3] (INT)
RLST 3312. The Pauline Interpretation of Christianity. [Formerly
RLST 212] An introduction to Pauline Christianity and its place in the early
church, using the letters of Paul, the deutero-Pauline letters, and the portrait of Paul in Acts. [3] (HCA)
RLST 3313. Ethics of the New Testament. [Formerly RLST 213] Major
ethical teachings as presented in New Testament documents, letters, and
as interpreted through history and cultures. [3] (HCA)
RLST 3316. Christianity in the Reformation Era. [Formerly RLST 216]
The setting of the Reformation (c. 1500-1648) and its developments together with consideration of some of the significant ecclesiastical, theological, and historical issues of the period. Attention to backgrounds and
causes and examination of major individuals and ecclesiastical patterns.
The aim of the course is to help students understand and interpret the
events, become familiar with some of the major theological documents,

RLST 3747. Daoist Tradition. [Formerly RLST 247] Historical and thematic survey of the Daoist tradition in China. Philosophical classics and
religious scriptures, as well as social history are covered. Daoism today.
[3] (HCA)
RLST 3749. Zen Buddhism. [Formerly RLST 249] A study of the development of Zen Buddhism in China and Japan with special attention to its
basic philosophy, its position within Mahayana Buddhism, its meditational
techniques, and its contemporary significance. [3] (INT)
RLST 3753. East Asian Buddhism. [Formerly RLST 253] East Asian
Buddhist texts. Key Buddhist ideas, values, practices, and institutions.
Chronological surveys of key developments in major historical periods. [3]
(INT)
RLST 3775. Chinese Religions through Stories. [Formerly RLST 275]
Analysis of narratives from various religious traditions and genres within
early and medieval China. The role of narrative in Chinese religious, cultural, and political life. Primary texts in English translation. Offered on a
graded basis only. [3] (INT)
RLST 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly RLST 289A] May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3850 and 3851combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester
of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of RLST
3850 and 3851] (No AXLE credit)
RLST 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly RLST 289B] May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3850 and 3851 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester
of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of RLST
3850 and 3851] (No AXLE credit)
RLST 3890. Special Topics in Religious Studies. [Formerly RLST 294]
May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in
topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each
semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
RLST 3900. Mysticism and Spirituality, Comparative Study. [Formerly RLST 200] Philosophical, historical, and textual perspectives. Key
mystical traditions, philosophies, texts, and figures from Hindu, Buddhist,

A&S

210
and Christian traditions. The popular emergence of spirituality as a contemporary mode of religiosity in advanced capitalist societies. [3] (P)
RLST 3921. Ethics and Ecology. [Formerly RLST 221] Relationships
among humans, nature, and the sacred. Focus on understandings of our
‘dominion’ over non-human nature. The role of religion in shaping attitudes
and behaviors regarding the environment. Topics include eco-centered
ethics, ‘creation care,’ reliance on fossil fuels, and alternative sustainable
scenarios. [3] (SBS)
RLST 3926. Ancient Goddesses. [Formerly RLST 226] Ancient concepts of the feminine divine in literature and iconographic evidence. Specific goddesses, their spheres of influence, and their place in the various
pantheons. Cultic practices and religious syncretism across cultures,
including Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Ancient Israel. Offered on a graded
basis only. [3] (INT)
RLST 3930. Women and Religion. [Formerly RLST 230] Themes and
issues in the traditions and texts of selected Western religions from a feminist perspective. Biblical and theological images of women, sources of
religious authority, psychological and ethical implications of feminist approaches to religion. [3] (P)
RLST 3940. The Nature of Evil. [Formerly RLST 240] Human evil as
expressed in the Shoah, religious fundamentalism, and ethnic cleansing.
Theological, philosophical, biological, and literary texts. Evil transformed
by scientific inquiry since 1600. [3] (HCA)
RLST 3941. Religion, Science, and Evolution. [Formerly RLST 241] Interactions between science and religion from antiquity to Charles Darwin.
Subsequent modifications of Darwinism and religious responsibilities to
evolutionary theories. [3] (SBS)
RLST 4100. Native American Philosophies. Shared concepts and
principles among contemporary Native American writers. Time, space,
personhood, ecology, and healing. Spirituality and narrative ontology. [3]
(HCA)
RLST 4551. Islamic Mysticism. [Formerly RLST 251] Origins and development of mystical traditions in Islam; rise of asceticism; early Sufis; development and systematization of Sufi orders and teachings; evolution of
theosophical dimensions of mysticism; present day Sufism and its spread
in North America; comparison of Islamic mysticism with other forms of
mysticism. [3] (HCA)
RLST 4552. Islam in the Modern World. [Formerly RLST 252] Impact of
colonialism on Muslim societies and everyday life in the cities of the Middle
East. Analysis through literary, religious, political, and ethnographic texts.
Relationship of Sharia to the modern state; impact of modernity on the
understanding and practice of religion. [3] (INT)
RLST 4554. The Qur’an and Its Interpreters. [Formerly RLST 254] The
Qur’an and the Islamic tradition of interpretation. The treatment of Biblical prophets, Jesus and Satan. Interpretations will be drawn from all time
periods including rationalist, dogmatic, Shi’i and mystical schools of interpretation. [3] (INT)
RLST 4562. Culture, Religion, and Politics of the Arab World. [Formerly RLST 262] Diversity and unity in Arab culture. Religious, sociopolitical, and historical factors shaping Arab identity in the modern age. Encounters and relationships between Arabs and the Western world. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 294 section 1 in summer 2008, summer 2009, or summer 2010.
[3] (INT)
RLST 4592. Advanced Seminar in Arabic. [Formerly RLST 292] Analysis of style and forms. Poetry, novels, popular literature, and historical
chronicles. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there
is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of
this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
RLST 4593. Advanced Seminar in Islamic Tradition. [Formerly RLST
293] Analysis of original Arabic texts, manuscript reading, and research
methods. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there
is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of
this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

vanderbilt university
RLST 4665. Mythologies and Epics of South Asia. [Formerly RLST
265] Classical Hindu and Buddhist mythologies of South Asia. Sanskrit
Mahabharata and Ramayana epics. Regional adaptations of mythical
themes in vernacular languages. Buddhist and Islamic narratives of romance and chronicle. Interpretive and performance strategies. Oral, literary, and visual modes of representation. Political deployment of myths.
[3] (INT)
RLST 4666. Devotional Traditions of South Asia: Hindu, Muslim,
Sikh. [Formerly RLST 266] Mythology of Hindu pantheon and worship
through devotion or bhakti. Techniques for inculcating devotion through
meditation, temple rituals, and pilgrimage. Entry of Islam into South Asia.
Shi’I and Sufi practices. Sikh traditions. Role of vernacular languages in
creating local traditions. Hindu-Muslim interaction, syncretism, and shared
sacred space. Challenges to orthodoxy. [3] (INT)
RLST 4774. Japanese Mythology. [Formerly RLST 274] Antiquity to the
present. Classic myths and re-tellings over time. Introduction to theoretical frameworks including comparative and historical. Politics, gender, and
performance. [3] (INT)
RLST 4834. Post-Freudian Theories and Religion. [Formerly RLST
234] An examination of contemporary European and American schools
of psychoanalysis. Focus on both the clinical and explanatory theories as
they relate to the examination of religious experience. Recommended:
1820 or 121. [3] (SBS)
RLST 4835. Freudian Theories and Religion. [Formerly RLST 235] A
critical assessment of psychoanalytic theories as an explanation of religious behavior. Study of the basic structure of these theories followed by a
systematic critique of texts by Sigmund Freud and Erik Erikson. Examination of religious narrative forms. [3] (SBS)
RLST 4836. The Religious Self according to Jung. [Formerly RLST
236] The religious core of human existence as related to the concepts of
the archaic unconscious and the birth of the self in C. G. Jung’s analytical psychology. Study of the life and thought of Jung as illustrated by his
autobiography, Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Critical assessment of his
theory as a means for understanding religious phenomena. [3] (SBS)
RLST 4837. Psychology of Religious Myth and Ritual. [Formerly RLST
237] Examination of religious rituals and myths from both Christian and
other traditions. Critical review of major psychological theories of ritual and
myth. Their relevance to an understanding of myth and ritual as religious
phenomena. [3] (SBS)
RLST 4938. Marriage in the Ancient Near East and the Hebrew Bible. [Formerly RLST 238] Religious, legal, and socio-economic aspects of
marriage. Survey of ancient Sumerian, Assyrian, Babylonian, and Egyptian
sources, and relevant sections of the Hebrew Bible. Marriage as an institution at the beginning of recorded history. [3] (INT)
RLST 4939. Religious Autobiography. [Formerly RLST 239] The construction of identity in religious autobiography: motivations (personal salvation, witness, proselytism); relationships among self, God, and religious
tradition; role of memory; cultural, gender, and religious differences. Readings may include Augustine, Gandhi, Malcolm X, Angelou, Wiesel. [3] (P)
RLST 4960W. Approaches to the Academic Study of Religion. [Formerly RLST 280W] Theories and methods for the academic study of religious traditions. Open only to junior and senior majors and minors. [3]
(HCA)
RLST 4970. Majors Colloquium. [Formerly RLST 298] Regular presentations and critical readings of student projects and professional writings.
May be repeated for credit twice for a total of 3 credit hours. Open only to
majors. [1] (No AXLE credit)
RLST 4998. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly RLST 299A] Reading of
primary research sources and writing an honors thesis under the supervision of the thesis adviser. Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)
RLST 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly RLST 299B] Reading of
primary research sources and writing an honors thesis under the supervision of the thesis adviser. Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses

Russian
RUSS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly RUSS 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
RUSS 1101. First-Year Russian. [Formerly RUSS 101] Elementary conversation and reading with an emphasis on everyday situations. An introduction to Russian culture and life through contemporary Russian materials. Five hours of class work. No credit for students who have earned
credit for a more advanced Russian language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)
RUSS 1102. First-Year Russian. [Formerly RUSS 102] Continuation of
1101 with emphasis on reading and talking about texts. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Russian language
course. Prerequisite: 1101. [5] (INT)
RUSS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly RUSS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)

211
sian blockbuster. Films by master directors Eisenstein, Vertov, Tarkovsky,
Sokurov, and Zvyagintsev. Soviet musicals and contemporary popular cinema. Knowledge of Russian not required. [3] (INT)
RUSS 2435. Leo Tolstoy: Anna Karenina and Other Masterpieces.
[Formerly RUSS 235] Early stories and post-conversion novellas. Realist
masterpiece Anna Karenina and its film adaptations. Moral inquiry in Tolstoy’s writing. Philosophical and psychological exploration into the themes
of love, adultery, religion, work, and art. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)
RUSS 2436. Tolstoy’s War and Peace. Tolstoy’s famous novel in cultural, historical, political, and religious context. Selected early and late pieces
by Tolstoy; critical commentaries on his place in Russian culture; and film
and operatic adaptations of War and Peace. Tolstoy as artistic innovator,
political anarchist, and significant moral voice for the 19th century. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 2435 offered spring 2016.
Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)
RUSS 2438. Dostoevsky’s The Brothers Karamazov. [Formerly RUSS
238] Historical, social, political, philosophical, and religious contexts of one
of the great epics of Western and Russian literature. Influence on 20th and
21st century literature and culture. Knowledge of Russian is not required.
[3] (INT)

RUSS 1874. Russian Fairy Tales. [Formerly RUSS 183] Perspectives
from history, psychology, politics, gender, and religion. Fairy tale adaptations by Pushkin, Tolstoy, Stravinsky, Nabokov, Bulgakov, and others.
Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS 2485. Russian Crime Fiction. Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Nabokov,
and others. Contemporary Russian interpretations of Sherlock Holmes
and of classic Russian crime cinema. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS 1910W. 19th Century Russian Literature. Literature as a battleground for the conflict between traditional values and new, rationalistic values introduced by industrialization and modernization. Gender relations,
role of religion, social status of art, and rise of radical political movements.
Texts by Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, and Chekhov. Knowledge of Russian not
required. No credit for students who earned credit for 2310. [3] (HCA)

RUSS 2537. Vladimir Nabokov. [Formerly RUSS 237] Major works including The Luzhin Defense, Lolita, Pnin, and Pale Fire. Examination of
Nabokov’s life through his memoir, Speak, Memory, and excerpts from
his unfinished final novel, The Original of Laura. Knowledge of Russian is
not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS 1911W. 20th Century Russian Literature. Masterpieces of literature as reflections of and reactions to massive social and political changes.
Utopian and dystopian writing; literature as investigative reporting; and
sincerity vs. postmodern irony. Return to nationalism in Putin’s Russia.
Including writings by Nabokov and six Nobel laureates: Bunin, Pasternak,
Sholokhov, Solzhenitsyn, Brodsky, and Alexievich. Soviet and contemporary genre fiction. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (HCA)

RUSS 2639. From the House of the Dead: Stories of Siberia. Depictions of Siberia from Russian and outside perspectives. Exile, imperial conquests, the Stalinist gulag, and native Siberian cultures. Works on Siberia
by Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Solzhenitsyn, Shostakovich, Kurosawa,
and Herzog. Pasternak’s Siberia-themed masterpiece Doctor Zhivago and
writings by native Siberians. Knowledge of Russian not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS 2201. Second-Year Russian I. [Formerly RUSS 203] Reading,
speaking, listening, and writing. Grammar review and reading of contemporary Russian texts. No credit for students who have earned credit for
2211 {205} or 2212 {206}. Prerequisite: 1102. [4] (INT)

RUSS 2645. Modernity and its Discontents: Russian and Brazilian
Literature and Film. From the 1850s to the present. Rise of modernity
in St. Petersburg and Rio de Janeiro (Dostoevsky, Machado de Assis).
Modern civilization and violence through war and the prison camp experience. Cinema and political utopia; and contemporary cinema. Knowledge
of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS 2202. Second-Year Russian II. [Formerly RUSS 204] Reading,
speaking, listening, and writing. Grammar review and reading of contemporary Russian texts. No credit for students who have earned credit for
2211 {205} or 2212 {206}. Prerequisite: 2201. [4] (INT)

RUSS 2745. Art After Zero: The Russian Avant-Garde. Creation out
of nothing (ex nihilo). Various media, 1910s-1930s. Works by Kandinsky,
Pasternak, Stravinsky, Prokofiev, Shostakovich, Eisenstein, and Vertov.
Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS 2210. Russia Today: Politics, Economics, and Culture. [Formerly RUSS 251] Four-week immersion in the history and culture of Russia. Travel to and interaction with residents in Vladimir, Moscow, St. Petersburg, and rural areas. Excursions to UNESCO World Heritage sites
and volunteering at community organizations. Pre-departure readings and
an examination must be completed. Knowledge of Russian is not required.
[3] (INT)

RUSS 2800. Viewing Communism in Eastern Europe. Exploration of
life in Communist Eastern Europe through film, memoir, fiction, photography, and documents. Life in a police-state, variations of socialism, dissent,
public memory of the Second World War, revolution, and Communist nostalgia and legacy. [3] (INT)

RUSS 2230. Russia at War. [Formerly RUSS 230] Russia’s wars as seen
through depictions in literature, film, music, and video games. Works by
Tolstoy, Eisenstein, Bulgakov, Babel, Borodin, and others. Knowledge of
Russian not required. [3] (INT)
RUSS 2273. Russian Science Fiction. [Formerly RUSS 173] Masterpieces of the genre including Tarkovsky’s Solaris and Stalker, the novels
of the Strugatsky Brothers, and Protazanov’s Aelita. Various media ranging from literature and film to video games. Knowledge of Russian not
required. [3] (INT)
RUSS 2434. Russian Cinema. [Formerly RUSS 234] Masterpieces of
Russian and Soviet cinema from the silent period to the present. Montage
theory, propaganda film, politics of the art house, and rise of the Rus-

RUSS 3303. Advanced Grammar and Reading. Advanced grammar
and reading skills. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisite: 2202.
[4] (INT)
RUSS 3305. Advanced Conversation and Composition. [Formerly
RUSS 257] Advanced conversation and composition skills. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisite: 2202. [4] (INT)
RUSS 3850. Independent Readings. [Formerly RUSS 289A] Designed
for majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under
the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a
four-semester period in 3850 and 3851 combined if there is no duplication
in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of RUSS 3850
and 3851] (No AXLE credit)

A&S

212
RUSS 3851. Independent Readings. [Formerly RUSS 289B] Designed
for majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under
the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a
four-semester period in 3850 and 3851 combined if there is no duplication
in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of RUSS 3850
and 3851] (No AXLE credit)
RUSS 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly RUSS 280A] Under faculty
supervision, students gain experience working in a variety of settings, such
as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research,
and social welfare organizations in the United States and Russia. Background reading and research must be completed in Russian 3881 concurrently with 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed,
independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may earn up to 6 hours of
3881 credit. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end
of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90
grade point average and prior approval of the director of undergraduate
studies of the student’s plans are required. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis
only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 cannot
be included in the minimum hours counted toward the Russian majors or
minors. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit)
RUSS 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly RUSS
280B] Under faculty supervision, students gain experience working in a
variety of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health,
media, political, research, and social welfare organizations in the United
States and Russia. Background reading and research in Russian 3881
must be completed concurrently with 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881
must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may
earn up to 6 hours of 3881 credit. A research paper and report must be
submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is
completed. A 2.90 grade point average and prior approval of the director
of undergraduate studies of the student’s plans are required. Corequisite:
3880. [Variable credit: 3-6] (No AXLE credit)

vanderbilt university
concepts and methods as they apply to social issues and policy. Focus
varies by section. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1020.
[3] (SBS)
SOC 1041. Men and Women in American Society. [Formerly SOC 104]
This course focuses on ideas about masculinity and femininity and how
these ideas carry with them inequalities in the distribution of power and
resources available to men and women. We examine how gender permeates seemingly neutral aspects of everyday life - how we date, sexuality,
family life, work relationships, political life, media images. Repeat credit for
students who have completed 1041W. [3] (P)
SOC 1041W. Men and Women in American Society. [Formerly SOC
104W] This course focuses on ideas about masculinity and femininity and
how these ideas carry with them inequalities in the distribution of power
and resources available to men and women. We examine how gender permeates seemingly neutral aspects of everyday life—how we date, sexuality, family life, work relationships, political life, media images. Repeat credit
for students who have completed 1041. [3] (P)
SOC 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly SOC 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)
SOC 2100. Statistics for Social Scientists. [Formerly SOC 127] Descriptive and inferential statistics with social science research applications. Sampling issues; describing data with measures of central tendencies and dispersion; hypothesis testing using categorical and continuous
indicators; multivariate techniques for continuous, categorical, and time
dependent data. Limited to majors and minors in Sociology, Public Policy
Studies, and Communication of Science and Technology, with preference
given to Sociology majors and minors. [3] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS 3890. Selected Topics. [Formerly RUSS 294A] May be repeated
for a total of 12 credit hours in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no
duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course each semester. [1-3&#59; maximum of 12 credit hours total for all
semesters of RUSS 3890 and 3891] (No AXLE credit)

SOC 3001. Sociological Perspectives. [Formerly SOC 201] Major classical and contemporary sociological perspectives such as symbolic interactionism, functionalism, and conflict sociology. Attention to the orientation and style of outstanding representatives of each perspective. Analysis
in terms of basic concepts, central questions, substantive themes, methodology, and bearing on contemporary social issues. [3] (P)

RUSS 3891. Selected Topics. [Formerly RUSS 294B] May be repeated
for a total of 12 credit hours in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no
duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 12 credit hours total for all semesters of RUSS 3890 and 3891] (No AXLE credit)

SOC 3002. Introduction to Social Research. [Formerly SOC 211]
Overview and evaluation of research strategies. Interpretation of qualitative
and quantitative data. Research methods and design. Evaluate research
ethics, research hypotheses, and literature reviews. Prerequisite: 1010,
1010W, 1020, or 1020W. Open only to majors. [3] (SBS)

Sociology
SOC 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly SOC 99] Topics vary. General
Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)
SOC 1010. Introduction to Sociology. [Formerly SOC 101] The study
of human society; the nature of culture and its organization. Processes of
communication, socialization, mobility, population growth. Repeat credit
for students who have completed 1010W. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 103. [3] (SBS)
SOC 1010W. Introduction to Sociology. [Formerly SOC 101W] The
study of human society; the nature of culture and its organization. Processes of communication, socialization, mobility, population growth. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1010. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 103. [3] (SBS)
SOC 1020. Contemporary Social Issues. [Formerly SOC 102] Social
change, conflict, and inequality in modern societies. Basic sociological
concepts and methods as they apply to social issues and policy. Focus
varies by section. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1020W.
[3] (SBS)
SOC 1020W. Contemporary Social Issues. [Formerly SOC 102W] Social change, conflict, and inequality in modern societies. Basic sociological

SOC 3003. Research Practicum. [Formerly SOC 212] Application of research skills acquired in 3002. A research report, including statement of
hypothesis, discussion of data and methods, and interpretation of results,
is required. Prerequisite: 3002 and either 2100, MATH 1011 or 2820, or
ECON 1500 or 1510. Open also to students who have earned credit for
PSY 2100 or PSY-PC 1400 and are majors in Child Development, Child
Studies, Cognitive Studies, Human and Organizational Development, or
A&S Psychology. [3] (No AXLE credit)
SOC 3201. Cultural Consumption and Audiences. [Formerly SOC
228] How audiences and consumers engage with art and culture—from
popular music to film, classical art, fashion, and food. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3202. Cultural Production and Institutions. [Formerly SOC 229]
The production of culture. The role of artists, firms, and markets in creating cultural objects, ideas, and practices, including: novels, television and
news, science, music, visual arts, and food. Prerequisite: 3201. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3203. Art in Everyday Life. [Formerly SOC 214] Art and the public
sphere. Cultural analysis, critical theory, art production and reception, curation, ethnography. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3204. Tourism, Culture, and Place. [Formerly SOC 218] The nature of tourist encounters. Marketing and displaying culture to tourists.
Implications for urban economies and landscapes, and for tourists and

College of Arts and Science / Courses

213

locals. Biweekly field trips in Nashville. Open only to Sociology majors and
minors. [3] (SBS)

persons in poor mental health and consequences of particular responses.
[3] (SBS)

SOC 3205. Seeing Social Life. [Formerly SOC 219] History, theory, and
ethics of visual images in sociological research. Truth status of visual data.
How individuals and groups use photographs to make sense of social
worlds. Race, ethnicity, gender, social class, and their visual documentation. Methods for collection and analysis of visual data, especially photographs. Prerequisite: SOC 1010, 1010W, 1020, 1020W, 1041, 1041W, or
ANTH 1101. [3] (SBS)

SOC 3304. Race, Gender, and Health. [Formerly SOC 268] Effect of
racial and ethnic background, gender, socioeconomic status, sexual identity, and age or generation on the experiences of health, illness, medical
institutions, and work in the health professions. [3] (SBS)

SOC 3206. Creativity and Innovation in Society. [Formerly SOC 227]
The social context for innovation and creativity. Interdisciplinary approaches to the creative process, invention, and entrepreneurship. Social relations and networks surrounding creative work; gate keeping; the diffusions
of innovation; changing institutions; and economic forces. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3207. Popular Culture Dynamics. [Formerly SOC 248] Examination of theories and research that link culture and society. Consideration of
the mass media arts with particular emphasis on popular music. Focus on
creators, industry, and audiences. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3213. Artists, Community, and Democracy. Communities of diverse artists, minority viewpoints, and cultural pluralism in a democratic
society. Contemporary United States with cross-cultural and historical
comparisons. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3221. The Family. [Formerly SOC 230] Study of the relationship
of family structure to social organization. Comparative and historical approaches to the family. Recent changes in the American family. Courtship,
marriage, marital adjustment, parenthood, and family dissolution in relation
to contemporary American society. [3] (P)
SOC 3222. Sociology of Religion. [Formerly SOC 246] Theories of the
nature, function, and structure of religion. Religion in America, including
fundamentalism, the Black Church, and cults. How religion changes and
is changed by secular society. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3223. Schools and Society: The Sociology of Education. [Formerly SOC 254] How schools affect individuals and relate to institutions:
the government, the economy, social classes, and families. How social
attributes, including race and class, affect academic achievement. Controversies such as desegregation and intelligence testing. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3224W. Sociology through Baseball. [Formerly SOC 265W]
Baseball as a social institution. Group dynamics, baseball as work and
business. Free agency and law, race and ethnic relations, and globalization. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3231. Contemporary Latin America. [Formerly SOC 277] Current
history and long-term trends; regional trade. Development strategies and
social inequalities. Hispanic Americans, immigration, and the U.S. border;
the war on drugs. Race, music, and popular culture. [3] (INT)
SOC 3232. Contemporary Mexican Society. [Formerly SOC 279]
Sociological understanding of contemporary Mexican society. Historical
roots of the modern Mexican state. Economic, political, and social institutions operating in Mexico, formal and informal structures, and their consequences. [3] (INT)
SOC 3233. Contemporary American Society. [Formerly SOC 235]
Shifts in the political, economic, and social structure of the United States;
changes in technology, demography, and social mores. [3] (US)
SOC 3301. Society and Medicine. [Formerly SOC 237] Cultural and social factors in the perception, definition, diagnosis, treatment, and distribution of disease. Doctor-patient relations; role of nurses and other health
professions. Social consequences of hospitals, medical technology, medical specialization, and health insurance. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3302. Poverty, Health, and Politics. [Formerly SOC 205] Politics of
poverty, health, and social welfare policy in the U.S. from the 1930s to the
present. Profiles of poverty and health. Social change, social movements,
advocacy, and social enterprise. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3303. Social Dynamics of Mental Health. [Formerly SOC 264]
Definition and classification of mental health and mental illness. Emphasis
on social factors affecting mental health. Different ways of responding to

SOC 3311. Climate Change and Society. [Formerly SOC 207] The sociology of climate change, including efforts to reduce greenhouse gases and
problems caused by climate change. Comparative analysis of how governments and businesses develop strategies to adapt to climate change.
[3] (SBS)
SOC 3312. Environment and Development. [Formerly SOC 208] Relationship between economic development and the natural environment.
Implications of development on our contemporary ways of life and the
environmental conditions of our planet. Different models of development
for both Western industrial and developing societies, from early imperialism to contemporary globalization. Current global environmental crises,
problems of environmental inequality and injustice, and social movements
for alternative development initiatives. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3313. Sociology of Health and Environmental Science. [Formerly SOC 206] Basic concepts in the sociology of science and their
applications to controversies in the health and environmental sciences.
Toxins and risk, nutrition, and health. Health and environmental aspects
of emerging technologies. Case studies to develop generalizable socialscience hypotheses. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3314. Environmental Inequality and Justice. [Formerly SOC 221]
Relationships between social inequalities and environmental degradation,
both in the U.S. and internationally. Distribution of environmental hazards
across race and class, natural resource rights and management, urban
health and sustainability, climate injustices, and environmental justice
movements. No credit for students who have earned credit for WGS 1111
section 4. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3315. Human Ecology and Society. [Formerly SOC 270] Demography, social organization, technology, and the global environment. Shifting energy systems; sustainable industries; food production. Growth vs.
development. Affluence, waste, and recycling. [3] (INT)
SOC 3316. Business, Civil Society, and the Environment. Environmental sustainability and social responsibility; interactions among private sector,
civil society, state, and consumers. Social movements and industry, politics
of green consumption, and rise of third-party certification movements and
private governance. Agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3317. Energy Transitions and Society. Comparisons of contemporary societies’ transition to low-carbon energy systems. Emphasis
on renewable energy and energy efficiency. Perspectives include both
wealthy and poor countries. [3] (INT)
SOC 3318. Sociology of Green Jobs. Comparative, historical, and
theoretical perspectives of the contemporary transformation of work and
employment in green jobs. Emphasis on the U.S. economy. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3321. Population and Society. [Formerly SOC 220] The mutual
influence of demographic factors and social structure. Trends in fertility,
mortality, population growth, distribution, migration, and composition.
Population policy and national development. [3] (INT)
SOC 3322. Immigration in America. [Formerly SOC 274] Theories of
international migration, with an emphasis on migration as a social process. Economic and social impact, including assimilation, immigrant incorporation, and the second generation. The migrant experience, including
transnational practices, and how immigration redefines race, ethnicity, and
gender. Immigration history of the United States. Current U.S. immigration
law and policy. Debate on open borders. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3601. Self, Society, and Social Change. [Formerly SOC 204]
Problems and prospects for individual participation in social change; volunteering, community service, and philanthropy; role of individuals and
voluntary associations in social change. [3] (SBS)

A&S

214
SOC 3602. Change and Social Movements in the Sixties. [Formerly
SOC 216] Mid-1950s to mid-1970s. The rise and influence of social movements in the 1960s, including civil-rights, student, anti-Vietnam War, feminist, and countercultural. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3603. Women and Social Activism. [Formerly SOC 225] History
of women’s participation in social movements. Women’s citizenship, environmentalism, second- and third-wave feminism, hate movements, and
global feminist activism. Theories of mobilization, collective identity, strategy, and movement outcomes. No credit for students who earned credit
for 1111 section 17. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3604. American Social Movements. [Formerly SOC 249] The effect of key social movements on American society. Comparison of the
organization and success of movements such as the American Revolution, Southern Secession, Populism, Woman’s Suffrage, and Civil Rights.
[3] (US)
SOC 3605. Law and Social Movements. [Formerly SOC 252] Social activists and their relationship to the law and legal institutions. Activist litigation, movement legislative influence, protest policing, government surveillance of activists, and rights consciousness. Civil rights, women’s, LGBT,
environmental, and labor movements. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3611. Women and the Law. [Formerly SOC 224] History of laws
subordinating women and efforts by feminists to achieve substantive and
procedural equity. American historical examples augmented by comparative research. Examines employment law, laws making rape and domestic
violence illegal, and tax law. [3] (P)
SOC 3612. Class, Status, and Power. [Formerly SOC 236] Analysis
of the competition for jobs, advancement, and income. The influence
of social background, education, politics, race, sex, changes in national
economy, and other factors will be considered. Theoretical and empirical
analysis focusing on the United States. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3613. Law and Society. [Formerly SOC 240] Law, inequality, and
racial, ethnic, gender, and economic groups in society. Operation of the
legal system, including lawyers, courts, and police. Advantages and disadvantages in law. Law’s role in social change. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3614. Politics, State, and Society. [Formerly SOC 244] The relationship between state and society; the nature and distribution of power in
democratic society; the social conditions necessary for democracy; social
movements and protest in political change; and the politics of public policy
making. Attention to political actions, definitions of citizenship, and political
ideology. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3615. Human Behavior in Organizations. [Formerly SOC 247] Organizations are treated as resources in the production and distribution of
goods and services. Case analyses from the economy are reviewed to diagnose “organizational pathologies” and to understand reciprocal impacts
among organizational structures, leaders, and citizens. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3616. Women and Public Policy in America. [Formerly SOC 251]
A study of public policies as they affect women in contemporary American society. Issues considered include participation of women in the labor
force; effects of employment patterns on the family; birth control, abortion, and health care policies; child care; participation of women in political
processes; divorce, child support, and custody; affirmative action policies;
present governmental remedies and proposed alternatives. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3621. Criminology. [Formerly SOC 231] The nature, distribution,
causes, and control of crime with emphases on contemporary American
society and a broad range of types of crime. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3622. Delinquency and Juvenile Justice. [Formerly SOC 232]
The nature, distribution, causes and control of juvenile delinquency and
the operation of the juvenile justice system in contemporary American society. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3623. Deviant Behavior and Social Control. [Formerly SOC 233]
The social causes of, and societal reactions to, several types of deviant
behavior (e.g., juvenile delinquency, crime, sex deviance, mental illness).
Examines the probable consequences of suggested solutions to reduce
different types of deviant behavior. [3] (SBS)

vanderbilt university
SOC 3624. Prison Life. [Formerly SOC 234] Prison life from the perspective of prisoners, officials, and the society in which they operate. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3701. Racial Domination, Racial Progress. [Formerly SOC 253]
Racial and ethnic relations in contemporary American society. Impact of
race and ethnicity on education, economics, politics, family, and health.
Study of Whites, Blacks, Hispanics, Asians, and Native Americans. Colorblind ideology. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3702. Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the United States. [Formerly SOC 255] Status of blacks, Asians, Hispanics, and other minorities.
Migration, identity and association, and strategies to improve group status
and reduce intergroup tensions. Comparisons to other countries. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3703. Social Psychology of Prejudice. [Formerly SOC 262] Prejudice and its amelioration. Problems of relations between blacks and whites
in the United States. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3704. Race, Gender, and Sport. [Formerly SOC 256] Manifestations of race and gender in sport. Emphasis on race and gender ideologies
and the associated inequalities in sport in America. International comparisons for context. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3711. Women, Gender, and Globalization. [Formerly SOC 239]
Globalization and its impact on women and gender relations. Multinational
corporations, economic development, and inequality; new forms of work;
human rights; feminist movements for change. [3] (INT)
SOC 3722. Gender in Society. [Formerly SOC 250] Theoretical approaches to gender relations with a focus on the contemporary U.S.
Evolution of gender stereotypes, gender socialization over the life course,
gender in social interactions, institutional sources of gender inequality, and
intersections of gender with race, social class, and sexual identity. Topics
include work, school, families, health, and intimate relationships. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3723. Gender, Sexuality, and the Body. [Formerly SOC 257] The
body is a physical marker of gender and sexuality. Biological reproduction is saturated with social meanings—shaping ideas about masculinity,
femininity, the gender division of labor, and heterosexuality. In this course,
we will look at the body as reflexive project and as the site of historical and
ideological significance. We address race, ethnicity, physical abilities, and
class in explaining variations in cultural ideals. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3724. Gender Identities, Interactions, and Relationships.
[Formerly SOC 272] Gender identities form and influence interactions in
friendships, intimate relations, families, education, and other institutions.
Changes and continuities in gender roles within the United States and
ways in which race, class, and sexual orientation intersect processes of
gender relations. [3] (SBS)
SOC 3851. Independent Research and Writing. [Formerly SOC 299]
May be repeated for a total of 6 credits. Students may enroll in more than
one section of this course each semester. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total
for all semesters of 3851] (No AXLE credit)
SOC 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly SOC 280B] Under faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as
civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research,
and social welfare organizations. Background reading and research will be
completed in Sociology 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, Sociology 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be
completed with hours taken in 3880. A research paper and report must be
submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training
is completed. A 2.90 grade point average, completion of 6 hours of prior
work in sociology, and prior departmental approval of the student’s plans
are required. Offered on a pass/fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 may not be included in the minimum
hours counted toward the sociology major. Corequisite: 3881. [1-9] (No
AXLE Credit)
SOC 3881. Internship Readings and Research. [Formerly SOC 280A]
Under faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety
of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media,
political, research, and social welfare organizations. Background reading
and research will be completed in Sociology 3881 concurrently with the
completion of internship training, Sociology 3880. A minimum of 3 hours

College of Arts and Science / Courses
of 3881 must be completed with hours taken in 3880. A research paper
and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the
internship training is completed. A 2.90 grade point average, completion
of 6 hours of prior work in sociology, and prior departmental approval of
the student’s plans are required. Corequisite: 3880. [3-6] (No AXLE credit)
SOC 4961. Seminars in Selected Topics. [Formerly SOC 294] May be
repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic. Students
may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3;
maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 4961] (No AXLE credit)
SOC 4981. Honors Research. [Formerly SOC 296] Research and writing
supervised by department staff culminating in the Senior Honors Thesis.
Work consists of both background reading and active research. May be
repeated for a total of 12 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. Open only
to honors candidates. Prerequisite or corequisite: 3002. [3-6; maximum of
12 credits total for all semesters of 4981] (No AXLE credit)

Spanish
SPAN 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly SPAN 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
SPAN 1100. Elementary Spanish I for True Beginners. [Formerly
SPAN 100] Designed exclusively for students with no previous exposure
to Spanish. Development of basic listening, speaking, reading, and writing
skills with Spanish-speaking culture through a communicative approach.
Conducted primarily in Spanish. Not open to students with previous training in Spanish. Four hours of classroom instruction plus one hour of independent research activities. Students continuing in Spanish take 1102.
No credit for students who have already completed 1100 or have earned
credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. Students wishing to
repeat this course must take 1101 for repeat credit. [5] (No AXLE credit)
SPAN 1101. Elementary Spanish I. [Formerly SPAN 101] Basic listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Communicative approach and
exposure to aspects of Spanish-speaking cultures. Conducted entirely in
Spanish. Four hours of classroom instruction plus one hour of independent research activities. Intended for students with prior study of the language and a departmental placement score under 275. Serves as repeat
credit for students who have completed 1100. No credit for students who
have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. [5] (No
AXLE credit)
SPAN 1102. Elementary Spanish II. [Formerly SPAN 102] Further development of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills using a communicative approach. Exposure to aspects of Spanish-speaking culture.
Conducted entirely in Spanish. Four hours of classroom instruction plus
one hour of independent research activities. Students continuing in Spanish take 2203. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more
advanced Spanish language course. Prerequisite: 1100 or 1101. [5] (INT)
SPAN 1103. Intensive Elementary Spanish. [Formerly SPAN 103] A
communicative approach to reading, writing, listening, and speaking for
students who have studied one to three years of Spanish. Rigorous review
of elementary Spanish through four hours of class instruction and one
hour of independent research activities. Departmental Spanish placement
exam score of 275-364. Students continuing in Spanish take 2203. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 1100, 1101, or 1102. No
credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish
language course. [5] (INT)
SPAN 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly SPAN 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)
SPAN 2203. Intermediate Spanish. [Formerly SPAN 104] Development
of intermediate linguistic competence in Spanish (listening, speaking,

215
reading, and writing) using a communicative approach. Study of cultures
of Spanish-speaking countries by incorporating authentic materials. Four
hours of classroom instruction plus one hour of independent research activities. Intended for students who have earned credit for 1102 or 1103 or
have a departmental placement score of 365-440. No credit for students
who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course.
[5] (INT)
SPAN 2780. Intensive Spanish. [Formerly SPAN 200] A one-month intensive course in the Spanish language, meeting before regular classes
begin. Emphasis is placed on conversation, reading, composition, and
grammar. Offered only in the Vanderbilt in Spain program. [3] (INT)
SPAN 2990. Images of the Feminine in Spanish Cinema. [Formerly
SPAN 292] Spanish national cinema from the death of Francisco Franco
to the present. Stories written, directed, and told by men about women.
Taught in English with subtitled films. Serves as repeat credit for students
who completed 296 section 1 in summer 2007, summer 2008, and summer 2009. [3] (P)
SPAN 2995. Contemporary Latin American Prose Fiction in English
Translation. [Formerly SPAN 293] Themes and techniques of the contemporary novel, novella, and short story written by both men and women
in Spanish America and Brazil. No credit for graduate students in Spanish
or Portuguese. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 3301W. Intermediate Spanish Writing. [Formerly SPAN 201W]
Development of abilities in composition tasks related to expository writing. Focus on rhetorical techniques for organizing information, vocabulary
abilities, and emphasis on collaborative work. Students write several short
papers and a final long paper. Intended for students who have earned
credit for 2203 or have a departmental Spanish placement exam score of
441 or higher. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3302. Spanish for Oral Communication through Cultural Topics. [Formerly SPAN 202] Development of speaking skills through the
study of Spanish and Hispanic culture, and Spanish and Spanish-American current affairs. Texts drawn from contemporary articles, short stories,
TV news, documentaries, and Web materials. Different registers of spoken
Spanish. The development of effective strategies for oral communication.
Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3301W. Students with advanced oral skills will be placed in a higher level course. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3303. Introduction to Spanish and Spanish American Literature. [Formerly SPAN 203] Critical reading and methods of literary analysis. Selections cover all genres in several periods. Prerequisite: 3301W
and 3302. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 3320. Introduction to Hispanic Cultural Studies. [Formerly
SPAN 204] An examination of contemporary Hispanic culture through a
variety of media (newspapers, magazines, comics, Web sites), arts, and
entertainment. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. Not open to students who
have studied abroad. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3325. The Way of Saint James. [Formerly SPAN 205] Origins
and development of the Way of Saint James, or Camino de Santiago,
through an examination of literature, art, history, and cultural and religious
issues. Contributions from the cult of Saint James and the Way to Spanish
national identity. Repeat credit for students who completed 296 section
1 in summer 2012 and summer 2013. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3]
(HCA)
SPAN 3330. Cultural Studies in the Andes. [Formerly SPAN 224] Contemporary Andean culture through the lenses of anthropology and archaeology. Popular and elite artistic productions, cultural syncretism, and
festive culture. Gender and society. Emphasis on hands-on learning on
site. Locations include Lima, Cuzco, and Machu Picchu. Maymester only.
Repeat credit for students who completed 204 section 1 in summer 2013
and summer 2014. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3340. Advanced Conversation. [Formerly SPAN 207] An intercultural approach contrasting Hispanic and American perspectives. Discussions and oral presentations on contemporary issues. For students with
a high level of oral proficiency, especially those returning from a semester
abroad. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3302. [3] (INT)

A&S

216
SPAN 3345. Spanish for Business and Economics. [Formerly SPAN
206] Linguistic skills and cultural information for conducting business in
the Spanish-speaking world. Basic syntactic and phonological structures
within the context of business. Activities to develop written, oral, and aural skills in several areas, including finance, management, marketing, and
tourism. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302.
[3] (INT)
SPAN 3350. Spanish for the Legal Profession. [Formerly SPAN 210]
Advanced conversation course emphasizing specialized Spanish legal terminology. The development of linguistic proficiency and cultural competency. Vocabulary acquisition, grammar review, translation practice, oral
presentations, and written papers. Prerequisite: 3301W, 3302, and 3303.
[3] (INT)
SPAN 3355. Advanced Conversation through Cultural Issues in
Film. [Formerly SPAN 208] Spanish and Latin American films as the basis
for discussion and analysis of linguistic, historic, cultural, and social issues.
Students are expected to have completed at least one Spanish language
course beyond 3303. Prerequisite: 3301W, 3302, and 3303. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3360. Spanish Civilization. [Formerly SPAN 221] The development of Spanish culture from the Middle Ages to the present in the context of Western civilization. Discussion of historical background, literary
and artistic trends, and political and socioeconomic patterns. Not open
to students who have attended Vanderbilt in Spain. Prerequisite: 3301W
and 3302. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3365. Film and Recent Cultural Trends in Spain. [Formerly
SPAN 226] The cinema and Spanish cultural evolution during and after the
Franco dictatorship. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3370. Spanish American Civilization. [Formerly SPAN 223] The
development of Spanish American culture from colonial times to the present; discussion of basic institutions, political and socioeconomic patterns,
education, the arts, and folklore. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3375. Film and Culture in Latin America. [Formerly SPAN 227]
Latin American cinema in historical perspective. Screenings, critical readings, and supplementary texts. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 3380. The Spanish Language. [Formerly SPAN 209] An advanced
grammar course with emphasis on problem constructions, stylistics, and
composition. Offered only in the Vanderbilt in Spain program. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3385. Creative Writing and Advanced Grammar. Development
of writing skills through advanced grammatical concepts, vocabulary, and
writing techniques and the production of short stories, essays, poems,
and other forms of textual discourse. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3830. Spanish for the Medical Profession. [Formerly SPAN 211]
Advanced conversation course incorporating linguistic skills and cultural
information relevant to medical issues in the Hispanic world. Service learning with the Latino and Latina community as an important component.
Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT)
SPAN 3835. Latino Immigration Experience. [Formerly SPAN 243] Literature and film that depict the immigration and assimilation experiences
of the main Latino groups. Service to the Latino community integral part of
course work. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly SPAN 289] Designed primarily for majors. Projects are arranged with individual professors and
must be approved by the director of undergraduate studies before the
close of registration in the semester of the project. May be repeated for a
total of 12 credits over a four semester period, but students may earn only
up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits
total for fours semesters of SPAN 3850] (No AXLE credit)
SPAN 3880. Internship Training in Spain. [Formerly SPAN 287B] Under
faculty supervision, students gain experience in public or private organizations and complete research and readings. Offered on a pass/fail basis
only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Corequisite: 3881. [1] (No
AXLE credit)
SPAN 3881. Internship Readings and Research in Spain. [Formerly
SPAN 287A] Under faculty supervision, students gain experience in public

vanderbilt university
or private organizations, and complete research and readings. Must be
taken concurrently with 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)
SPAN 3891. Special Topics in Hispanic Culture. [Formerly SPAN 296]
Prerequisite: 3303. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is
no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of
this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
SPAN 3892. Special Topics in Spanish Language and Linguistics.
[Formerly SPAN 295] Prerequisite: 3303. May be repeated for credit more
than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more
than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
SPAN 3893. Special Topics in Hispanic Literature. [Formerly SPAN
294] Prerequisite: 3303. May be repeated for credit more than once if
there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
SPAN 4300. Introduction to Spanish Linguistics. [Formerly SPAN 212]
Major linguistic subsystems of the Spanish language. Morphology, syntax,
phonetics and phonology. Semantics and pragmatics, dialectology, and
sociolinguistics. No previous knowledge of linguistics required. No credit
for students who earned credit for 295 section 1 in spring 2011. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4310. Translation and Interpretation. [Formerly SPAN 213]
Theory and practice of translation and interpretation, both from English to
Spanish and Spanish to English. Practical knowledge of the basic modes
of translation (direct and oblique) and interpretation (sight, consecutive,
and simultaneous). Emphasis on the fundamentals of translation in legal,
medical, literary, business, commercial, media, sports, and other fields.
Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4315. Contrastive Analysis of Spanish and English. [Formerly
SPAN 217] A comparison of the phonological, morphological, and syntactical structures of Spanish and English to demonstrate the similarities
and differences between the linguistic systems of these two languages.
Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4320. Phonology. [Formerly SPAN 216] Analysis of the production,
nature, and systematic function of the sounds of the Spanish language,
as well as of problems frequently experienced by non-native speakers.
Both standard and dialect features of Spanish are examined. Prerequisite:
3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4325. Dialectology. [Formerly SPAN 214] Formation, general
characteristics, distinctive features, and geographical extension of the
principal dialectal regions of Spain and Spanish America. Both historical
and modern dialects are considered. Emphasis on non-standard dialectal
varieties of Spanish. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4330. Words and Stems. [Formerly SPAN 215] A morphological
presentation of the structural principles governing the creation of noun,
verb, adjective, and adverb along with an overview of the formation of the
underlying stems. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4335. Morphology and Syntax. [Formerly SPAN 218] An introduction to the principles of modern Spanish morphology (word formation)
and syntax (phrase structure and usage) through an analysis of the native
speaker’s organization of reality and use of language to reflect and to express that organization. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4340. History of the Spanish Language. [Formerly SPAN 219]
Origins and evolution of the Spanish (Castilian) language. Emphasis on the
phonological and morphological development of Spanish within historical
and cultural contexts of the Iberian Peninsula. Prerequisite: 3301W and
3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4345. The Languages of Spain. [Formerly SPAN 220] Origins,
development, and the contemporary sociolinguistic situation of the principal languages and dialects of Spain, including Castilian, Catalan, Galician,
and Basque. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)
SPAN 4350. Communicating Across Cultures. [Formerly SPAN 282]
Relationships among discourse, identity, and culture. Linguistic construction of ethnicity and gender. Latin American and U.S. Latino ways of
speaking. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (SBS)

College of Arts and Science / Courses

217

SPAN 4355. Spanish in Society. [Formerly SPAN 283] Language variation and linguistic change. Regional, socioeconomic, gendered, and ethnic differences in spoken Spanish. Language as it shapes the identities of
speakers. Language use in social contexts with comparisons to English.
Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (SBS)

SPAN 4620. Love and Honor in Medieval and Golden Age Literature. [Formerly SPAN 256] The evolution of the key themes of love and
honor in works from various genres of medieval and Golden Age Spanish literature with special attention to sociohistorical context. Prerequisite:
3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN 4360. Discourse Analysis. [Formerly SPAN 285] Linguistic pragmatics. Speech acts in conversation as patterned activity rather than unpredictable behavior. Implications, presuppositions, discourse markers,
and other pragmatic units. Comparisons with English. Prerequisite: 3303.
[3] (SBS)

SPAN 4640. Don Quixote. [Formerly SPAN 246] Directed reading and
intensive study of the novel. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN 4400. The Origins of Spanish Literature. [Formerly SPAN 231]
From its beginnings to the Renaissance; the creation of a social order
and a cultural tradition. Close study of three literary landmarks – Poema
del Cid, Libro de Buen Amor, La Celestina – and other prose and poetry
selections. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4405. Literature of the Spanish Golden Age. [Formerly SPAN
232] Representative works from early modern Spain, including poetry,
prose, and drama of the Renaissance and Baroque periods. Prerequisite:
3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4410. Spanish Literature from the Enlightenment to 1900.
[Formerly SPAN 233] Essays and Neoclassic literature. Romanticism, Realism, and Naturalism. Representative works and authors from all genres.
Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4415. Spanish Literature from 1900 to the Present. [Formerly
SPAN 234] Representative authors and works. Prerequisite: 3303. [3]
(HCA)
SPAN 4420. Spanish American Literature from the Conquest to
1900. [Formerly SPAN 235] Development of all forms from colonial times
to the end of the 19th century. Patterns of interaction of Amerindian,
African, and European cultural traditions. Unity and diversity of Spanish
American literature. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4425. Spanish American Literature from 1900 to the Present.
[Formerly SPAN 236] The works of Neruda, Borges, Paz, Garcia Márquez
and others. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4440. Development of the Short Story. [Formerly SPAN 260]
From early manifestations in Spain through its current forms in Spain and
Spanish America. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4445. Development of the Novel. [Formerly SPAN 239] From the
seventeenth century through Realism and Naturalism in Spain and Spanish America. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4450. The Contemporary Novel. [Formerly SPAN 240] New
forms in the twentieth-century novel in Spain and Spanish America. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4455. Development of Drama. [Formerly SPAN 251] Spanish
theatrical works from 1600 to 1900, including the Golden age comedia,
neoclassicism, romanticism, and early realism in drama. Prerequisite:
3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4465. The Theory and Practice of Drama. [Formerly SPAN 281]
Critical works and plays from different periods. Introduction to the principles of dramaturgy. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4470. Development of Lyric Poetry. [Formerly SPAN 230] Popular and traditional forms; the sonnet and other Renaissance and Baroque
classical forms. Romanticism. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4475. Contemporary Lyric Poetry. [Formerly SPAN 237] From
Modernism to the present in Spain and Spanish America. Prerequisite:
3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4550. The Theory and Practice of Literary Translation. [Formerly SPAN 271] Theoretical approaches and their consequences for the
interpretation of translated texts. Practical application of these principles in
the translation of both Spanish and Portuguese texts into English. Taught
in Spanish. Written work in Spanish or Portuguese. Serves as repeat credit
for students who completed 294 section 3 in fall 2013 or spring 2013, or
294 section 1 in spring 2012. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN 4670. Spanish Realism. [Formerly SPAN 258] Methods of, implications to, and pitfalls of creating realistic characters in nineteenth-century
Spanish novels. Prerequisite 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4690. Alterity and Migration in Spain. [Formerly SPAN 264] Historical and literary texts about nationalism and cultural difference. Representations of contact with Africa, the Americas, and Asia; regional identities; immigration; gender and racial issues. Repeat credit for students
who completed 294 section 2 in fall 2010 or section 1 in spring 2014.
Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 4720. Literary Genres and National Identities in Latin America.
[Formerly SPAN 277] A comparative approach to the rise of the national literary traditions from independence to the latter half of the twentieth century.
Indigenist novels, abolitionist narratives, and gaucho poetry by colonial figures, including African slaves, indigenous peoples, and Argentine Gauchos.
Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 294 section 1 in spring
2013. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 4725. Jungle Narratives in Latin America. From the colonial
period to the present. Evolution of the representation of the jungle. Serves
as repeat credit for students who completed 3893 section 1 in fall 2016.
Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4730. Modern Latin American Poetry. [Formerly SPAN 273] Development of poetry in Spanish America and Brazil during the twentieth
century. Major poets and movements, including both Spanish American
Modernismo and Brazilian Modernismo. Poetry as a genre; composition
and discussion of students’ poetry. Taught in Spanish. Serves as repeat
credit for students who completed 294 section 2 in fall 2013 or 294 section 1 in fall 2012. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4740. Spanish-American Literature of the Boom Era. [Formerly SPAN 247] The Boom novel of the 1960s: Carlos Fuentes’ La muerte
de Artemio Cruz, Julio Cortázar’s Rayuela, Mario Vargas Llosa’s La ciudad
y los perros, Guillermo Cabrera Infante’s Tres tristes tigres, and Gabriel
García Márquez’s Cien años de soledad. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)
SPAN 4741. Spanish-American Literature of the Post-Boom Era.
[Formerly SPAN 248] The post-Boom novel from the 1970s to the present; analysis of related films. Manuel Muig’s Boquitas pintadas, Me llamo
Rigoberta Menchú, Laura Esquivel’s Coma agua para chocolate, Reinaldo
Arena’s Viaje a La Habana, and Daisey Rubiera Castillo’s Reyita, sencillamente. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 4750. Afro-Hispanic Literature. [Formerly SPAN 244] From nineteenth-century slave narrative to modern writers such as Miguel Barnet,
Alejo Carpentier, and Quince Duncan. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 4755. Latina and Latin American Women Writers. [Formerly
SPAN 275] Contemporary writing of women in Latin America and of Latinas in the United States. Representation of sexuality and the maternal
body. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 4760. Literature and Medicine. [Formerly SPAN 274] Modern
intersections of literature and medicine in Latin America. From the social
hygiene literature of the nineteenth century to the autobiographical disease
narrative of the late twentieth century. Prerequisite 3303. [3] (P)
SPAN 4810. Images of the City. [Formerly SPAN 263] Literary representations of cityscapes in Spain and Latin America. Repeat credit for
students who completed 294 section 2 in fall 2011. Prerequisite: 3303.
[3] (HCA)
SPAN 4980. Undergraduate Seminar. [Formerly SPAN 280] Close contextual readings of major Hispanic literary texts through selected critical
approaches. Open to junior and senior majors in Spanish; required of candidates for honors. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

A&S

218
SPAN 4998. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly SPAN 299A] [3] (No AXLE
credit)
SPAN 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly SPAN 299B] [3] (No AXLE
credit)

Theatre

vanderbilt university
THTR 2311W. Writing for the Stage and Screen. Techniques for writing plays and screenplays with critical attention to dramatic themes and
characterization. [3] (HCA)
THTR 2651. Play Direction. [Formerly THTR 230] Play direction as an aid
to critical understanding and appreciation of the theatre. Development of
techniques. Prerequisite: 1611. [3] (HCA)

THTR 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly THTR 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

THTR 2781. The History of Fashion: Sex and Propaganda. [Formerly
THTR 216] Men’s and women’s fashion from ancient times to the present.
Women’s roles in society as reflected in their clothing. [3] (P)

THTR 1010. Fundamentals of Theatre. [Formerly THTR 100] An introduction to the various elements that combine to form a theatrical experience; the development of critical standards to judge these elements in
performance. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1111.
Repeat credit for students who have completed 1010W. [3] (HCA)

THTR 3201W. Contemporary Drama and Performance Criticism.
[Formerly THTR 206W] Dramatic literature and performance theory. Advanced techniques in writing performance criticism. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 203. Prerequisite: at least sophomore standing
and 1010, 1010W, or 1111. [3] (P)

THTR 1010W. Fundamentals of Theatre. [Formerly THTR 100W] An
introduction to the various elements that combine to form a theatrical experience; the development of critical standards to judge these elements
in performance. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1111.
Repeat credit for students who have completed 1010. [3] (HCA)

THTR 3281. Theatre in London. [Formerly THTR 280] Intensive overseas summer study program in contemporary British theatre. Ten productions in London covering a broad spectrum of theatrical offerings. Weekly
seminars with artists and administrators from the British professional
stage. [3] (P)

THTR 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly THTR 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion,
oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit
once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to
3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of
6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by
section)

THTR 3311. Playwriting. [Formerly THTR 225] Instruction in writing plays
with critical attention to dramatic themes and characterization. Prerequisite: 1010, 1010W, or 1111 and consent of the instructor. [3] (HCA)

THTR 1611. Acting I. [Formerly THTR 219] The role of the actor in the
theatre with emphasis on artistic self-expression through improvisation
and development of performance skills. Available on a graded basis only.
[3] (HCA)
THTR 1711. Introduction to Theatrical Production. [Formerly THTR
110] Contemporary concepts, methods, and practices employed in the
planning and implementation of stage scenery and lighting. Communication, creative problem solving, and organizational management through
research, lecture, and class discussion. [4] (HCA)
THTR 1741. Art of Scene Painting. [Formerly THTR 112] Concepts,
methods, and practices in scenic artistry. Contemporary and historical examples. Impact on theatrical design and production. [3] (HCA)
THTR 1751. Fundamentals of Theatre Design. [Formerly THTR 111]
Roles and skills of scenic, costume, and lighting designers. Critical assessment of design quality. Elements and principles of design, script analysis,
dramaturgical and visual research, color theory and practice. [4] (HCA)
THTR 1811. Marshals, Mobsters, Monsters, Magnums, and Musicals: American Movie Genres. [Formerly THTR 171] Western, gangster,
horror, private eye, and musical genres. Representative films from each
category reflecting the evolution of the genre and the changing American
landscape. [3] (US)
THTR 2201. Histories of Theatre and Drama I: Ritual and World
Performance. [Formerly THTR 201] Including festivals of ancient Greece,
Rome, Medieval Europe, and Mesoamerica; Japanese Noh, Kabuki, and
Bunraku; African dance and postcolonial theatre. [3] (INT)
THTR 2202W. Histories of Theatre and Drama II: The European
Stage. [Formerly THTR 202W] Including the Italian Renaissance, French
neoclassicism, English Restoration, German and French romanticism, and
the modernist movements of realism, symbolism, Dada and futurism, expressionism, epic theatre, and absurdism. [3] (INT)
THTR 2204. Histories of Theatre and Drama III: The U.S. Stage. [Formerly THTR 204] Including British colonial and revolutionary drama; frontier theatre; melodrama; minstrelsy, vaudeville, burlesque, and the musical
stage; pageantry and community theatre; postwar realism; African-American, Chicana/o, feminist, and Asian-American theatre movements. [3] (US)

THTR 3600. Rehearsal-Acting. [Formerly THTR 221] Students performing major roles in university theatre productions may receive 1 credit hour
per role at the discretion of the director. Full character analysis and periodic reports of rehearsal progress are required. Prerequisite: 3611. May
be repeated for a total of 3 credits, but students may earn only up to 2
credits per semester of enrollment. [1-2; maximum of 3 credits total for all
semesters of THTR 3600] (No AXLE credit)
THTR 3611. Acting II. [Formerly THTR 220] The actor’s role in the theatre
with emphasis on acting as character interpretation and ensemble performance through analysis and scene study. Offered on a graded basis only.
Prerequisite: 1611. [3] (HCA)
THTR 3651. Intermediate Play Direction. [Formerly THTR 231] Development of theoretical and practical approaches to directing dramatic
texts. Emphasis on research, interpretation, and communication. Prerequisite: 2651. [3] (HCA)
THTR 3700. Rehearsal-Production. [Formerly THTR 211] Students
performing major technical assignments in university theatre productions
may receive 1 credit hour per assignment at the discretion of the technical director. Detailed plans of expected work and full reports on all crew
sessions are to be submitted. May be repeated for a total of 3 credits,
but students may earn only up to 2 credits per semester of enrollment.
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. [1-2; maximum of 3 credits total for all
semesters of THTR 3700] (No AXLE credit)
THTR 3721. Elements of Basic Design: Scenery and Props. [Formerly
THTR 212] Aesthetics and processes. Development and communication
of design ideas through script analysis, research, virtual and physical model-building. Contemporary scenic practices. Prerequisite: 1711. [4] (HCA)
THTR 3741. Elements of Basic Design: Costuming and Makeup.
[Formerly THTR 214] Aesthetics and processes. Development and communication of design ideas through the drawing and rendering of the costumed figure. Prerequisite: 1711 or 2781. [4] (HCA)
THTR 3761. Elements of Basic Design: Lighting and Sound. [Formerly THTR 213] Aesthetics and processes. Development and communication of design ideas through script analysis and research. Lighting and
audio theory and practice. Contemporary lighting and audio technology.
Prerequisite: 1711. [4] (HCA)
THTR 3781. Management in the Theatre. [Formerly THTR 218] Roles
of theatre and stage managers. Tools and methods. Organizational theories and skills. Prerequisite: 1711. [3] (HCA)
THTR 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly THTR 289] A research project in selected aspects of theatre and drama to be arranged with the
instructor. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Courses
THTR 3891. Selected Topics in Theatre. [Formerly THTR 294] Intensive
study of a particular area of theatre. Emphasis on personal investigation
and written reports. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is
no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of
this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
THTR 4201. Shakespeare in the Theatre. [Formerly THTR 232] Selected plays and scenes. Theoretical and practical exploration of script,
theatre, and audience in terms of production, past and present. [3] (HCA))
THTR 4611. Problems of Acting Style. [Formerly THTR 223] Advanced
scene study, investigating methods used today to perform drama of past
eras which used non-realistic styles. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3611. [3] (HCA)
THTR 4961. Senior Seminar: Performance Ensemble. [Formerly
THTR 261] Advanced development of artistic, communicative, and organizational skills required to create theatre. Culminates in a public performance. Open to senior majors only. Prerequisite: 1010, 1010W, or 1111;
1711; 1751; 1611; and 2651. [3] (HCA)
THTR 4998. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly THTR 299A] Independent
research and completion of an honors thesis, done in consultation with a
member of the faculty in Theatre. Open only to those who qualify to begin
departmental honors work in Theatre. [3] (No AXLE credit)
THTR 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly THTR 299B] Independent
research and completion of an honors thesis, done in consultation with a
member of the faculty in Theatre. Open only to those who qualify to begin
departmental honors work in Theatre. [3] (No AXLE credit)

Tibetan
TBTN 1101. Elementary Tibetan I (UVA). Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan. Listening, speaking, reading, and writing from Tibetan short stories, proverbs, and other sources. Tibetan culture. Offered
on a graded basis only. [4] (No AXLE credit)
TBTN 1102. Elementary Tibetan II (UVA). Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan; listening, speaking, reading and writing. Examples
from Tibetan short stories and proverbs, among other sources. Exposure
to Tibetan culture to improve communication skills, using a dynamic, interactive format . Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [4] (INT)
TBTN 2201. Intermediate Tibetan I (UVA). Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan. Listening, speaking, reading, and writing through
the integrated use of spoken and literary forms. Enhanced knowledge of
Tibetan culture. Offered on a graded basis only. [4] (INT)
TBTN 2202. Intermediate Tibetan II (UVA). Grammar and syntax
of spoken and written Tibetan; listening, speaking, reading and writing
through spoken and literary forms. Further study of Tibetan culture to improve communication skills. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite:
2201. [4] (INT)

Women’s and Gender Studies
WGS 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly WGS 99] Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly WGS 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express
knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if
there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits
in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits
total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

219
Women and men in literature, art, culture, politics, institutions. Repeat
credit for students who have completed 1150. [3] (P)
WGS 1160. Sex and Society. [Formerly WGS 160] Historical, cultural,
and social contexts of sexual diversity, discrimination, and sexual violence.
Understanding the centrality of sexuality to identity; challenging harmful
modes of sexual expression; developing critical awareness of sex and
sexuality. [3] (P)
WGS 1272. Feminism and Film. [Formerly WGS 272] Images of gender
and race; techniques, sound, lighting, cinematography in relation in gender. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (US)
WGS 2225. Women in Popular Culture. [Formerly WGS 200] Gender
differentiation in popular culture and mass-market products. Portrayal of
women in movies, print, music, and the Internet. The sources and effects
of these portrayals. Women as both consumers and the consumed. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)
WGS 2240. Introduction to Women’s Health. [Formerly WGS 240]
How culture influences women’s health, body image, self esteem. Issues
include fertility control and child bearing, medical innovations to detect
disease, alternative therapies, psychological well-being, sexuality, physical
and sexual abuse. Impact of politics on health options for women. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 2242. Women Who Kill. [Formerly WGS 242] Examination of classical and contemporary representations of women who kill. [3] (P)
WGS 2243. Sociologies of Men and Masculinity. [Formerly WGS 243]
Traditional and emerging perspectives on masculinity and male genderroles. Emphasis on relationship between social forces and males’ everyday experiences across the life-span. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or
1160. [3] (P)
WGS 2244. The Body, Culture, and Feminism. The body as a cultural,
social, and historical construction. Western culture and narratives of “normalcy” and their impact on identity and representation. Body image and
eating disorders. Cultural politics of size, weight, and shape. Disability.
Cosmetic surgery. Prerequisite: 1150, 1150W, or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 2248. Humor and Cultural Critique in Fannie Flagg’s Novels.
[Formerly WGS 248] Humor used to address cultural issues in Southern
small-town America from 1920-1970. Gender, race, community, and feminism in Fannie Flagg’s novels. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 2249. Women and Humor in the Age of Television. [Formerly
WGS 249] The period 1950 to present. Television variety shows, sitcoms,
and stand-up comedy as media for promoting women’s humor and feminism. Comedy as a means of dealing with difficult personal and social
issues. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)
WGS 2252. Sex and Scandals in Literature. [Formerly WGS 252] From
the eighteenth century to the present. Women’s and men’s disorderly
conduct as represented in literary texts. Charlotte Rowson, Kate Chopin,
Edith Wharton, Henry James, and Toni Morrison. [3] (HCA)
WGS 2254. Feminist Fictions. [Formerly WGS 254] From the nineteenth
century to the present. Feminist ideas and ideals as represented in literary texts. Kate Chopin, Edith Wharton, Virginia Woolf, Alice Walker, and
Margaret Atwood. [3] (HCA)
WGS 2259. Reading and Writing Lives. [Formerly WGS 259] Interdisciplinary exploration of life-stories as narratives. Strategies of self-representation and interpretation, with particular attention to women. Includes
fiction, biography, autobiography, history, ethnography, and the writing
of life-story narratives. Repeat credit for students who have completed
2259W. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)

WGS 1150. Sex and Gender in Everyday Life. [Formerly WGS 150] Sex
and gender roles in culture and society. Gender, race, and class. Women
and men in literature, art, culture, politics, institutions. Repeat credit for
students who have completed 1150W. [3] (P)

WGS 2259W. Reading and Writing Lives. [Formerly WGS 259W] Interdisciplinary exploration of life-stories as narratives. Strategies of self-representation and interpretation, with particular attention to women. Includes
fiction, biography, autobiography, history, ethnography, and the writing of
life-story narratives. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2259.
Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)

WGS 1150W. Sex and Gender in Everyday Life. [Formerly WGS 150W]
Sex and gender roles in culture and society. Gender, race, and class.

WGS 2262. Gender and Ethics. [Formerly WGS 262] Religious worldviews connected to moral traditions. Epistemological and ethical systems

A&S

220
and their relationship to gender and patriarchy. Social construction of gender; violence against women; feminism; and difference. No credit for students who earned credit for RLST 223 before fall 2014. [3] (P)
WGS 2267. Seminar on Gender and Violence. [Formerly WGS 267]
In-depth study of violence against women, with a service-learning component in a community setting. Topics include domestic abuse, rape, sexual
harassment, pornography, and global violence. Focus on problems and
potential solutions, examining violence on a societal, institutional, and individual level, interrogating the “personal as political,” and exposing power
structures that shape our communities. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or
1160. [3] (P)
WGS 2268. Gender, Race, Justice, and the Environment. [Formerly WGS 268] Gender and racial aspects of environmental degradation.
Risk, activism, health and illness, policy and politics. Prerequisite: 1150 or
1150W or 1160. [3] (SBS)
WGS 2270. Ecofeminism: Theory, Politics, and Action. [Formerly
WGS 270] Interconnections among the exploitation of nature, the oppression of women, and the abuse of resources that have led to the current
global ecological crisis. [3] (SBS)
WGS 2612. Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Studies. [Formerly WGS 212] Introductory study of sexual identity, queer theory, relationships, politics. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)
WGS 2613. Compulsory Couplehood. From the nineteenth century to
the present. Legal and societal implications of marriage. Marginalization of
the single person. Different gendered stereotypes of the uncoupled adult,
including the bachelor and the spinster. Non-normative forms of kinship
and relationships. Primarily United States with global perspectives. Scholarly and pop-cultural texts. [3] (P)
WGS 3201. Women and Gender in Transnational Context. [Formerly
WGS 201] Gender as a social construction. Feminist critiques of knowledge, family and work, sexuality, health and medicine, and the women’s
movement. The future of feminism in global context. Prerequisite: 1150 or
1150W or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 3246W. Women’s Rights, Women’s Wrongs. [Formerly WGS
246W] Intellectual and theoretical foundations for contemporary feminist
theory and politics in the United States, based upon works by nineteenthand twentieth-century authors. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3]
(US)
WGS 3250. Contemporary Women’s Movements. [Formerly WGS
250] Recent feminist history. The origins and parameters of women’s
movements from the 1960’s to the present. Repeat credit for students
who have completed 3250W. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 3250W. Contemporary Women’s Movements. [Formerly WGS
250W] Recent feminist history. The origins and parameters of women’s
movements from the 1960’s to the present. Repeat credit for students
who have completed 250. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 3271. Feminist Legal Theory. [Formerly WGS 271] Theoretical issues about the interaction between law and gender. Application of feminist analysis and perspective to law relating to family, work, criminal law,
reproductive freedom, pornography, and sexual harassment. Prerequisite:
11150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 3273. Seminar on Psychoanalysis and Feminism. [Formerly
WGS 273] Historical and contemporary perspectives on the long and
ambivalent relationship between psychoanalysis and feminism. Trauma,
hysteria, narcissism, gender, and the family. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W
or 1160. [3] (P)
WGS 3281. Globalization and Policy-Making. [Formerly WGS 281]
Western historical conceptualizations of the state. Socio-political contexts.
Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (INT)
WGS 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly WGS 289] A program of
reading and research for advanced students in an area of women’s and
gender studies arranged in consultation with an adviser. Prerequisite:
1150 or 1150W. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester

vanderbilt university
of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of WGS
3850] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 3880. Internship Training. [Formerly WGS 288A] Under faculty
supervision, students gain experience combining theoretical and practical work in a project related to social change and focused on women,
feminism, or gender. Legislative, community, educational, or non-profit
settings. Internship plan developed between student and faculty sponsor,
with approval of Women’s and Gender Studies program director. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester.
Must be taken on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently
with 3882 and/or 3883. These hours may not be included in the minimum
hours required for the women’s and gender studies major. Prerequisite:
3201 and one other 2000-level (or higher) Women’s and Gender Studies
course, and a 2.90 grade point average. Corequisite: 3882 and/or 3883.
[1-9] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 3882. Internship Readings. [Formerly WGS 288C] Under faculty
supervision, students gain experience combining theoretical and practical work in a project related to social change and focused on women,
feminism, or gender. Legislative, community, educational, or non-profit
settings. Internship plan developed between student and faculty sponsor,
with approval of Women’s and Gender Studies program director. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester.
Prerequisite: 3201 and one other 3000-level Women’s and Gender Studies course, and a 2.90 grade point average. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable
credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 3883. Internship Research. [Formerly WGS 288B] Under faculty
supervision, students gain experience combining theoretical and practical work in a project related to social change and focused on women,
feminism, or gender. Legislative, community, educational, or non-profit
settings. Internship plan developed between student and faculty sponsor, with approval of Women’s and Gender Studies program director. A
thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester. Prerequisite: 3201 and one other 2000-level (or higher) Women’s
and Gender Studies course, and a 2.90 grade point average. Corequisite:
3880. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 3891. Special Topics: Topics in Gender, Culture, and Representation. [Formerly WGS 294A] Topics vary. Prerequisite: 1150 or
1150W or 1160. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no
duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 3892. Special Topics: Topics in Gender, Society, and Political Economy. [Formerly WGS 294B] Topics vary. Prerequisite: 1150 or
1150W or 1160. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no
duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this
course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 3893. Selected Topics. [Formerly WGS 295] Topics vary. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. May be repeated for credit more than once
if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one
section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 4960. Senior Seminar. [Formerly WGS 291] Advanced reading and
research. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 4998. Honors Research. [Formerly WGS 298] Reading and research under the guidance of a faculty supervisor. Consent of both the
faculty supervisor and the director of Women’s and Gender Studies program required. Open only to honors candidates. May be repeated for a
total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic. [3-6; maximum of 6
credits total for all semesters of WGS 4998] (No AXLE credit)
WGS 4999. Honors Thesis. [Formerly WGS 299] Open only to seniors in
the Women’s and Gender Studies Honors Program. May be repeated for
a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic. [3-6; maximum of 6
credits total for all semesters of WGS 4999] (No AXLE credit)

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty

221

College of Arts and Science Administration and Faculty
LAUREN BENTON, Ph.D., Dean
BONNIE J. DOW, Ph.D., Dean of Humanities
KAMAL SAGGI, Ph.D., Dean of Social Sciences
DAVID W. WRIGHT, Ph.D., Dean of Sciences
ANDRÉ CHRISTIE-MIZELL, Ph.D., Senior Associate Dean
KEIVAN G. STASSUN, Ph.D., Senior Associate Dean
YOLLETTE T. JONES, Ph.D., Associate Dean
ROGER E. MOORE, Ph.D., Associate Dean
DANIEL MORGAN, Ph.D., Associate Dean
JONATHAN PETTY, B.A., Associate Dean for Arts and Science
Development
ALAN ITKIN, Ph.D., Assistant Dean
PATRICK J. RETTON II, B.S., Chief Business Officer
MELISSA WOCHER, B.A., Administrative Director

Named and Distinguished Chairs
CELIA STEWART APPLEGATE, William R. Kenan, Jr., Chair in History
HOUSTON A. BAKER, JR., University Distinguished Professor of English
LARRY M. BARTELS, May Werthan Shayne Chair in Public Policy and
Social Science
LAUREN A. BENTON, Nelson O. Tyrone, Jr., Chair in History
MICHAEL D. BESS, Chancellor’s Chair in History
DAVID BLACKBOURN, Cornelius Vanderbilt Distinguished Chair in History
RICHARD BLACKETT, Andrew Jackson Chair in American History
RANDOLPH BLAKE, Centennial Professor of Psychology
ERIC W. BOND, Joe L. Roby Chair in Economics
KENDAL SCOT BROADIE, Stevenson Chair in Neurobiology
WILLAM CAFERRO, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in History
MARIA CAMPOS-PONS, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Art
KENNETH C. CATANIA, Stevenson Chair in Biological Sciences
JAY CLAYTON, William R. Kenan, Jr., Chair in English
JOSHUA D. CLINTON, Abby and Jon Winkelried Chair in Political Science
WILLIAM COLLINS, Terence E. Adderley, Jr., Chair in Economics
JEFFERSON R. COWIE, James G. Stahlman Chair in American History
KATHERINE CRAWFORD, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Women’s and
Gender Studies and History
ANDREW DAUGHETY, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Economics
COLIN DAYAN, Robert Penn Warren Chair in the Humanities
ARTHUR A. DEMAREST, Ingram Chair in Anthropology
EMMANUELE DIBENEDETTO, Centennial Professor of Mathematics
DENNIS C. DICKERSON, Reverend James M. Lawson, Jr., Chair in
History
TOM DILLEHAY, Rebecca Webb Wilson University Distinguished Chair in
Anthropology and Religion and Culture
TONY LEE EARLEY, Samuel Milton Fleming Chair in English
LYNN E. ENTERLINE, Nancy Perot Mulford Chair in English
JAMES A. EPSTEIN, Distinguished Professor of History
EDWARD FISCHER, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Anthropology
LEONARD FOLGARAIT, Distinguished Professor of History of Art
EDWARD H. FRIEDMAN, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Spanish
ISABEL GAUTHIER, David K. Wilson Chair in Psychology
JOHN G. GEER, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Political Science
LENN E. GOODMAN, Andrew W. Mellon Chair in the Humanities
JOHN C. GORE, Hertha Ramsey Cress University Chair in Radiology and
Radiological Sciences and Biomedical Engineering and Physics
SENTA VICTORIA GREENE, Stevenson Chair in Physics
RICHARD F. HAGLUND, JR., Stevenson Chair in Physics
BARBARA HAHN, Max Kade Foundation Chair in German Studies
JOSEPH H. HAMILTON, Landon C. Garland Distinguished Chair in Physics
JOEL HARRINGTON, Centennial Professor of History
DAVID J. HESS, James Thornton Fant Chair in Sustainability Studies
RUTH HILL, Andrew W. Mellon Chair in the Humanities
STEVEN D. HOLLON, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Psychology

GEORGE M. HORNBERGER, University Distinguished Professor of Civil
and Environmental Engineering and Earth and Environmental Sciences
ATSUSHI INOUE, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Economics
LARRY W. ISAAC, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Sociology
MARK JARMAN, Centennial Professor of English
CHRISTOPHER M. S. JOHNS, Norman L. and Roselea J. Goldberg Chair
in Art History
CARL H. JOHNSON, Stevenson Chair in Biological Sciences
JEFFREY N. JOHNSTON, Stevenson Chair in Chemistry
VAUGHAN JONES, Stevenson Distinguished Chair in Mathematics
JON H. KAAS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Distinguished Chair in
Psychology
CINDY D. KAM, William R. Kenan, Jr., Chair in Political Science
GENNADI KASPAROV, Stevenson Chair in Mathematics
LUTZ KOEPNICK, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in German
VERA M. KUTZINSKI, Martha Rivers Ingram Chair in English
JOHN LACHS, Centennial Professor in Philosophy
PETER LAKE, Martha Rivers Ingram University Distinguished Chair in
History
JONATHAN LAMB, Andrew W. Mellon Chair in the Humanities
JANE G. LANDERS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in History
DAVID E. LEWIS, William R. Kenan, Jr., Chair in Political Science
TONG LI, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Economics
GORDON D. LOGAN, Centennial Professor of Psychology
WILLIAM LUIS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Spanish
LEAH S. MARCUS, Edwin Mims Chair in English
LAWRENCE J. MARNETT, University Professor of Biochemistry, Chemistry,
and Pharmacology; Mary Geddes Stahlman Chair
HOLLY McCAMMON, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Sociology
RALPH MCKENZIE, Distinguished Professor of Mathematics
JOHN MCLEAN, Stevenson Chair in Chemistry
DOUGLAS G. MCMAHON, Stevenson Chair in Biological Sciences
JONATHAN METZL, Frederick B. Rentschler II Chair in Sociology and
Medicine, Health, and Society
CALVIN F. MILLER, William R. Kenan, Jr., Chair in Earth and Environmental
Sciences
LORRIE MOORE, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in English
KEVIN D. MURPHY, Andrew W. Mellon Chair in the Humanities
DANA NELSON, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in English
MOSES OCHONU, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in History
KELLY OLIVER, W. Alton Jones Chair in Philosophy
ALEXANDER OL’SHANSKIY, Centennial Professor of Mathematics
SOKRATES T. PANTELIDES, University Distinguished Professor of Physics
and Engineering; William A. and Nancy F. McMinn Chair in Physics
SOHEE PARK, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Psychology
JAMES G. PATTON, Stevenson Chair in Biological Sciences
JENNIFER F. REINGANUM, E. Bronson Ingram Chair in Economics
ANTONIS ROKAS, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Biological Sciences
SANDRA J. ROSENTHAL, Jack and Pamela Egan Chair in Chemistry
EDWARD L. RUBIN, University Professor of Law and Political Science
KAMAL SAGGI, Frances and John Downing Family Chair
MARK SAPIR, Centennial Professor of Mathematics
JEFFREY D. SCHALL, E. Bronson Ingram Chair in Neuroscience
LARRY L. SCHUMAKER, Stevenson Chair in Mathematics
MITCHELL A. SELIGSON, Centennial Professor in Political Science
TRACY D. SHARPLEY-WHITING, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in
African American and Diaspora Studies and French
HELMUT W. SMITH, Martha Rivers Ingram Chair in History
HORTENSE J. SPILLERS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in English
KEIVAN G. STASSUN, Stevenson Chair in Physics
TONY K. STEWART, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in the Humanities
GARY ALLEN SULIKOWSKI, Stevenson Chair in Chemistry
ROBERT B. TALISSE, W. Alton Jones Chair in Philosophy
CECELIA TICHI, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in English
DANIEL H. USNER, JR., Holland M. McTyeire Chair in History

A&S

222
W. KIP VISCUSI, University Distinguished Professor of Law, Economics,
and Management
DAVID J. WASSERSTEIN, Eugene Greener, Jr., Chair in Jewish Studies
JOHN A. WEYMARK, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Economics
JOHN P. WIKSWO, JR., Gordon A. Cain University Chair in Physics;
A. B. Learned Chair in Living State Physics
RHONDA WILLIAMS, John L. Seigenthaler Jr. Chair in American History
ALAN WISEMAN, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Political Science
DAVID CHARLES WOOD, W. Alton Jones Chair in Philosophy
DAVID W. WRIGHT, Stevenson Chair in Chemistry
DAVID HAROLD ZALD, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Psychology
ELIZABETH ZECHMEISTER, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Political Science
MEL ZIEGLER, Paul E. Shwab Chair in Fine Arts
LAURENCE J. ZWIEBEL, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Biological Sciences

Faculty Council
John McLean, Chair. Patrick Abbot, Secretary. Ex officio: Dean of the
College.
DIVISIONAL MEMBERS.
Terms expiring May 2018: William J. Collins, John McLean, Cecelia Tichi
Terms expiring May 2019: Patrick Abbot, Lisa Guenther, José Medina,
		
Mike Neamtu, Lijun Song, Edward Wright-Rios
AT-LARGE MEMBERS.
Terms expiring May 2018: Beth Conklin, Sarah Igo, David Weintraub
Rosters for the following Arts and Science committees are available at
as.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/committees.php.
ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE
ADMISSIONS COMMITTEE
ART GALLERY COMMITTEE
AXLE IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE ON ACADEMIC STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE EDUCATION
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH RELATED PROFESSIONS
COMMITTEE ON INDIVIDUAL PROGRAMS
COMMITTEE ON UNDERGRADUATE INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES
CURRICULUM COMMITTEE
SECOND LANGUAGE STUDY COMMITTEE
STUDENT-FACULTY RELATIONS COMMITTEE
STUDY ABROAD COMMITTEE

Faculty
DOUGLAS KILPATRICK ABBOT, Associate Professor of Biological
Sciences; Vice Chair of Biological Sciences
B.S. (Georgia 1989); M.S. (Simon Fraser [Canada] 1994); Ph.D.
(Arizona 2001) [2004]
BROOKE A. ACKERLY, Professor of Political Science; Associate Professor
of Law
B.A. (Williams 1988); Ph.D. (Stanford 1997) [2001]
PHILLIP I. ACKERMAN-LIEBERMAN, Associate Professor of Jewish
Studies; Associate Professor of Law; Associate Professor of History
B.A. (University of Washington 1990); M.S. (London School of
Economics [U.K.] 1991); M.A. (Jewish Theological Seminary 2002);
Ph.D. (Princeton 2007) [2009]
JOHN F. AHNER, Professor of Mathematics
B.A., Ph.D. (Delaware 1967, 1972) [1974]

vanderbilt university
VALERIANO AIELLO, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
A.B., M.A., Ph.D. (Rome [Italy] 2010, 2013, 2017) [2017]
SCOTT F. AIKIN, Assistant Professor of Philosophy
A.B. (Washington University 1994); M.A. (Montana 1999); M.A., Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2003, 2006) [2006]
LEONARD P. ALBERSTADT, Professor of Geology, Emeritus
B.S., M.S. (Tulane 1959, 1962); Ph.D. (Oklahoma 1967) [1967]
ROYAL G. ALBRIDGE, JR., Professor of Physics, Emeritus
B.S. (Ohio State 1955); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1960) [1961]
AKRAM ALDROUBI, Professor of Mathematics
M.S. (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 1982); Ph.D. (Carnegie
Mellon 1987) [1997]
FRANCES ALPREN, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A., M.A. (Louisiana State 1983, 1983) [2002]
CANDICE AMICH, Assistant Professor of English
M.A., Ph.D. (Rutgers 2008, 2012) [2014]
CLIFFORD ANDERSON, Associate University Librarian for Research and
Learning; Professor of Religious Studies
B.A. (Kenyon 1992); M.Div. (Harvard 1995); Th.M., Ph.D. (Princeton
Theological Seminary 1996, 2005); M.S. (Pratt Institute 2012) [2017]
KATHRYN H. ANDERSON, Professor of Economics; Director, Graduate
Program in Development Economics
B.A. (Kentucky, Lexington 1972); M.Econ., Ph.D. (North Carolina State
1974, 1978) [1980]
ALLISON P. ANOLL, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (William and Mary 2009); Ph.D. (Stanford 2016) [2016]
CELIA APPLEGATE, William R. Kenan, Jr., Chair in History; Professor of
History; Vice Chair of History
B.A. (Bryn Mawr 1981); Ph.D. (Stanford 1987) [2012]
DAVID MICHAEL ARONOFF, Addison B. Scoville, Jr., Chair in Medicine;
Professor of Medicine; Professor of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology; Associate Professor of Medicine, Health, and Society;
Director, Division of Infectious Diseases
B.S. (Indiana, Fort Wayne 1991); M.D. (Tufts 1995) [2013]
LINDA G. ASHFORD, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics; Assistant
Professor of Psychology
B.S., M.S. (Tennessee 1971, 1973); M.S., Ph.D. (Peabody 1982, 1988)
[1995]
JEREMY ATACK, Professor of Economics, Emeritus; Research Professor
of Economics
B.A. (Cambridge [U.K.] 1971); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1976)
[1993]
SCOTT A. ATKINSON, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (Vanderbilt 2010); Ph.D. (Virginia 2016) [2016]
JAMES E. AUER, Senior Lecturer in Asian Studies, Emeritus
B.A. (Marquette 1963); M.A., M.A.L.D., Ph.D. (Tufts 1969, 1970, 1972)
[1988]
PAVNEET S. AULAKH, Lecturer in English
B.A., M.A. (Boston University 1999, 2003); M.A., Ph.D. (California,
Santa Barbara 2007, 2013) [2014]
MICHAEL L. AURBACH, Professor of Art, Emeritus
B.A., B.S.J., M.A., B.F.A. (Kansas 1974, 1976, 1979, 1981); M.F.A.
(Southern Methodist 1983) [1986]
JOHN C. AYERS, Professor of Earth and Environmental Sciences;
Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (SUNY, Fredonia 1985); M.S. (Pennsylvania State 1988); Ph.D.
(Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 1991) [1991]
JOSE AZNAR, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A., M.L.A. (Arkansas Tech 1995, 1998) [2007]
ANNALISA AZZONI, Senior Lecturer in Hebrew Bible;Senior Lecturer in
Religious Studies
Laurea (Rome [Italy] 1989); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 2001) [2003]
BETH BARNYOCK BACHMANN, Writer in Residence in English
B.A. (Loyola College [Maryland] 2000); M.A. (Johns Hopkins 2001);
M.A. (Concordia, Montreal [Canada] 2003) [2003]
BRIAN O. BACHMANN, Professor of Chemistry; Professor of Biochemistry
B.S. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute 1992); M.S. (Southern Methodist
1994); M.A., Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1997, 2000) [2003]
JO-ANNE BACHOROWSKI, Associate Professor of Psychology
A.B. (Holy Cross College 1980); M.S., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1986, 1991)
[1995]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
HOUSTON BAKER, JR., University Distinguished Professor of English
B.A. (Howard 1965); M.A., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1966, 1968)
[2006]
LEWIS V. BALDWIN, Professor of Religious Studies, Emeritus
B.A. (Talladega 1971); M.A., M.Div. (Rochester 1973, 1975); Ph.D.
(Northwestern 1980) [1984]
ROBERT A. BALDWIN, Professor Emeritus of Art and Art History
A.B. (Oberlin 1952); M.F.A. (Yale 1955) [1957]
JOHN PAUL BARACH, Professor of Physics, Emeritus
A.B. (Princeton 1957); Ph.D. (Maryland 1961) [1961]
TRACY T. BARRETT, Senior Lecturer in Italian, Emerita
A.B. (Brown 1976); M.A., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1979, 1988) [1984]
ROBERT F. BARSKY, Professor of French and Comparative Literature;
Professor of European Studies; Professor of Law; Director of the W. T.
Bandy Center for Baudelaire and Modern French Studies
B.A. (Brandeis 1984); M.A., Ph.D. (McGill [Canada] 1987, 1992) [2003]
LARRY BARTELS, May Werthan Shayne Chair in Public Policy and Social
Science; Professor of Political Science
B.A., M.A. (Yale 1978, 1978); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1983) [2011]
FAITH E. BARTER, Lecturer in English; Pre-Major Academic Adviser
A.B. (Dartmouth 2001);J.D. (American 2007); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
2012, 2016) [2016]
STEVEN BASKAUF, Senior Lecturer in Biological Sciences
B.A. (Bluffton 1982); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1999) [1999]
VANESSA BEASLEY, Dean of The Martha Rivers Ingram Commons;
Associate Professor of Communication Studies; Associate Professor of
Political Science
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1988); M.A., Ph.D. (Texas 1991, 1996) [2007]
GEORGE BECKER, Associate Professor of Sociology
B.A. (SUNY, New Paltz 1964); M.A. (Columbia 1968); M.S., Ph.D.
(Stony Brook 1972, 1976) [1977]
DOMINIQUE BEHAGUE, Associate Professor of Medicine, Health, and
Society
B.A., M.A. (Bryn Mawr 1991, 1992); Ph.D. (McGill [Canada] 2004); M.S.
(London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 2009) [2012]
VEREEN M. BELL, Professor of English, Emeritus
B.A. (Davidson 1955); Ph.D. (Duke 1959) [1961]
JADA BENN TORRES, Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Notre Dame 1999); M.S., Ph.D. (New Mexico 2001, 2006) [2016]
RALF BENNARTZ, Professor of Earth and Environmental Sciences
M.S. (Hamburg [Germany] 1994); Ph.D. (Freie Universitat Berlin
[Germany] 1997) [2013]
JEFFREY A. BENNETT, Associate Professor of Communication Studies
B.A. (Wayne State 1996); M.A. (Northern Illinois 1998); Ph.D. (Indiana,
Bloomington 2004) [2016]
AMANDA R. BENSON, Senior Lecturer in Biological Sciences
B.A. (Oberlin 1984); Ph.D. (Harvard 1995) [2005]
BRETT V. BENSON, Associate Professor of Political Science
Ph.D. (Duke 2006) [2006]
LAUREN A. BENTON, Dean of the College of Arts and Science; Nelson O.
Tyrone, Jr., Chair in History; Professor of Law
A.B. (Harvard 1978); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1987) [2015]
M. FRANCILLE BERGQUIST, Professor of Spanish, Emerita
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Texas Tech University 1968, 1970, 1977) [1977]
SUSAN BERK-SELIGSON, Professor of Spanish, Emerita; Research
Professor of Spanish
B.A. (CUNY, Brooklyn College 1967); M.A. (Pittsburgh 1971); Ph.D.
(Arizona 1978) [2004]
ANDREAS BERLIND, Associate Professor of Physics and Astronomy
A.B. (Princeton 1995); Ph.D. (Ohio State 2001) [2007]
MICHAEL D. BESS, Chancellor’s Professor of History; Professor of
European Studies
B.A. (Reed 1979); M.A., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1983, 1989) [1989]
PIYALI BHATTACHARYA, Writer in Residence in English
B.A. (Bryn Mawr 2007); M.A. (London [U.K.] 2009); M.F.A. (Wisconsin
2016) [2016]
LAURA ELIZABETH BIRDSALL, Lecturer in English; Pre-major Academic
Advisor
B.A. (California, Los Angeles 2009); M.F.A. (Vanderbilt 2016) [2016]

223
DIETMAR BISCH, Professor of Mathematics; Director of the Center for
Noncommutative Geometry and Operator Algebras
Hauptdiplo (Hamburg [Germany] 1984); Maitrise (Paul Sabatier [France]
1985); Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1991) [2002]
CARWIL ROBERT BJORK-JAMES, Assistant Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Northwestern 1996); M.P.P. (Chicago 1998); M.Phil., Ph.D. (CUNY
2010, 2013) [2013]
SOPHIE STATZEL BJORK-JAMES, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Anthropology
B.A. (Western Washington 2000); M.Ed. (Toronto [Canada] 2005); Ph.D.
(CUNY 2013) [2014]
DAVID BLACKBOURN, Cornelius Vanderbilt Distinguished Chair; Professor
of History
B.A., Ph.D. (Cambridge [U.K.] 1970, 1976) [2012]
RICHARD J. M. BLACKETT, Andrew Jackson Professor of American
History; Professor of American Studies
B.A. (Keele [U.K.] 1969); M.A. (Manchester [U.K.] 1973) [2002]
RANDOLPH BLAKE, Centennial Professor of Psychology; Professor of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences; Vice Chair of Psychology
B.A. (Texas 1967); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1969, 1972) [1988]
BURTON J. BOGITSH, Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus
A.B. (New York 1949); M.A. (Baylor 1954); Ph.D. (Virginia 1957) [1964]
ANNA MARIE BOHMANN, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2005); M.A. (New York
2006); M.S., Ph.D. (Chicago 2007, 2011) [2015]
ERIC W. BOND, Joe L. Roby Professor of Economics
B.S. (Lehigh 1974); M.A., Ph.D. (Rochester 1977, 1979) [2003]
WILLIAM JAMES BOOTH, Professor of Political Science
B.A., M.A. (McGill [Canada] 1975, 1978); Ph.D. (Harvard 1982) [1996]
SETH R. BORDENSTEIN, Associate Professor of Biological Sciences;
Associate Professor of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Rochester 1997, 1999, 2002) [2008]
DARRYL J. BORNHOP, Professor of Chemistry
B.S., M.A. (Missouri, Saint Louis 1980, 1982); Ph.D. (Wyoming 1987)
[2003]
BARBARA C. BOWEN, Professor of French, Emerita
B.A., M.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1958, 1962); Doctorat dEtat (Paris I [France]
1962) [1987]
JOHN L. BRADLEY, Senior Lecturer in English and Writing; Assistant
Director of the Writing Studio
B.A. (Wake Forest 2001); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2003, 2011) [2012]
CYNTHIA BRAME, Senior Lecturer in Biological Sciences; Assistant
Director, Center for Teaching
B.S. (Centre 1994); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1999) [2012]
CHARLES A. BRAU, Professor of Physics, Emeritus; Research Professor
of Physics
B.S. (Cornell 1961); A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard 1962, 1965) [1988]
JONATHAN E. BREMER, Senior Lecturer in Philosophy; Program
Coordinator, A&S Dean’s Office
B.A. (Wisconsin 1981); M.A., Ph.D. (Toronto [Canada] 1982, 1992);
Master (Ball State 2001) [2005]
GABRIEL BRIGGS, Senior Lecturer in English
B.A., M.A. (Belmont 1995, 2002); Ph.D. (Kentucky, Lexington 2009)
[2009]
KENDAL SCOT BROADIE, Stevenson Professor of Neurobiology;
Professor of Pharmacology; Professor of Cell and Developmental
Biology
B.S. (Oregon 1989); Ph.D. (Cambridge [U.K.] 1994) [2002]
DEREK BRUFF, Senior Lecturer in Mathematics; Director for the Center for
Teaching
B.S. (Furman 1998); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2000, 2003) [2009]
ARI BRYEN, Assistant Professor of History and Classical and
Mediterranean Studies
B.A. (Maryland 2001); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 2003, 2008) [2016]
LAUREN ELIZABETH BUCHANAN, Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (Washington University 2008); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2013) [2016]
STEPHEN GARY BUCKLES, Principal Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.A. (Grinnell 1965); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1975) [1994]
THOMAS G. BURISH, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A. (Notre Dame 1972); M.A., Ph.D. (Kansas 1975, 1976) [1976]

A&S

224
VICTORIA A. BURRUS, Associate Professor of Spanish
B.S., M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1974, 1976, 1985) [1986]
NEIL S. BUTT, Senior Lecturer in Communication Studies
B.A., M.A. (George Mason 1993, 2000); Ph.D. (Wayne State 2010)
[2010]
BRANDON R. BYRD, Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (Davidson 2009); M.A. (William and Mary 2011); Ph.D. (North
Carolina 2014) [2016]
WILLIAM CAFERRO, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of History
B.A. (Haverford 1984); Ph.D. (Yale 1992) [1998]
DAVID J. CALKINS, Denis M. O’Day, M.B.B.S., Chair in Ophthalmology
and Visual Sciences; Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences;
Professor of Pharmacology; Professor of Psychology
B.S. (Michigan 1989); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1995) [2004]
CELINA CALLAHAN-KAPPOR, Senior Lecturer in Medicine, Health, and
Society
B.A. (Massachusetts 1997); M.A. (Wayne State 2008); Ph.D. (California,
Santa Cruz 2016) [2016]
ROBERT FORD CAMPANY, Professor of Asian Studies
B.A. (Davidson 1981); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1983, 1988) [2010]
JONATHAN A. CAMPBELL, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2007); Ph.D. (Stanford
2013) [2016]
KAREN E. CAMPBELL, Professor of Sociology, Emerita
A.B. (Randolph-Macon Woman’s College 1977); M.A., Ph.D. (North
Carolina 1982, 1985) [1985]
LAUREN PALLADINO CAMPBELL, Lecturer in Physics; Pre-major
Academic Advisor
B.S. (Hofstra 2007); M.A. (Fisk 2009); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2015) [2015]
Maria Magdalena Campos-Pons, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair;
Professor of Art
M.F.A. (Massachusetts College of Art and Design 1988) [2017]
JOHN ANTHONY CAPRA, Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences;
Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.A. (Columbia 2004); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2006, 2009) [2013]
JOSE A. CARDENAS BUNSEN, Assistant Professor of Spanish
B.A., Licenciatura (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú 1995, 1998);
M.Phil., M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 2004, 2004, 2009) [2012]
DAVID LEE CARLTON, Associate Professor of History
B.A. (Amherst 1970); M.Phil., M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1974, 1974, 1977)
[1983]
CHRISTOPHER CARPENTER, Professor of Economics; Professor of Law;
Professor of Public Policy and Education; Professor of Health Policy
B.A. (Albion 1997); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2002) [2013]
LAURA M. CARPENTER, Associate Professor of Sociology
B.A., B.S. (Boston University 1991, 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania
1995, 1999) [2002]
KATHERINE BLUE CARROLL, Assistant Professor of Political Science;
Director of the Public Policy Studies Program
B.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1992); M.A., Ph.D. (Virginia 1996, 2001)
[2003]
CLINT E. CARTER, Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Loma Linda 1965, 1967); Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles
1971) [1973]
MADELEINE CASAD, Senior Lecturer in Cinema and Media Arts;
Associate Director of the Digital Humanities Center
B.A. (Iowa 2001); M.A., Ph.D. (Cornell 2005, 2012) [2016]
CELSO CASTILHO, Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (California, Berkeley 1998); M.A. (California, Los Angeles 2000);
Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2008) [2008]
ANNA CASTILLO, Mellon Assistant Professor of Spanish
B.A. (North Carolina, Chapel Hill 2009); Ph.D. (Stanford 2017) [2017]
ELIZABETH J. CATANIA, Assistant Professor of Neuroscience
B.A. (Delaware 1998); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2008) [2011]
KENNETH C. CATANIA, Stevenson Professor of Biological Sciences
B.S. (Maryland 1989); M.S., Ph.D. (California, San Diego 1992, 1994)
[1997]
WILLIAM F. CAUL, JR., Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A. (Bucknell 1960); M.S., Ph.D. (Carnegie Institute of Technology
1962, 1965) [1970]

vanderbilt university
REBECCA CHAPMAN, Senior Lecturer in English
M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2005, 2009) [2009]
FORREST TAYLOR CHARNOCK, Senior Lecturer in Physics
B.S. (Furman 1991); Ph.D. (Wake Forest 1999) [2013]
TIZOC CHAVEZ, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (California State 2008); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2016) [2016]
EDUARD Y. CHEKMENEV, Associate Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences; Associate Professor of Physics; Associate
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Perm State [Russia] 1998); Ph.D. (Louisville 2003) [2009]
LI MIN CHEN, Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Associate Professor of Psychology
M.D., M.S., Ph.D. (Fourth Military Medical [China] 1989, 1992, 1997)
[2003]
RACHEL ROTH CHIGULURI, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (Connecticut 1990); M.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1997, 1998,
2001) [2001]
ANDRE CHRISTIE-MIZELL, Senior Associate Dean of Undergraduate
Education; Professor of Sociology; Professor of American Studies
B.A. (Oberlin 1990); M.A., Ph.D. (Ohio State 1993, 1997) [2010]
CHENG CHU, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (Fudan [China] 2011); M.S., Ph.D. (Washington University 2013,
2016) [2016]
DAN M. CHURCH, Professor of French, Emeritus
B.A. (Wake Forest 1961); M.A. (Middlebury 1962); Ph.D. (Wisconsin
1967) [1967]
LILY CLAIBORNE, Senior Lecturer in Earth and Environmental Sciences
B.S. (University of the South 2002); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006, 2011)
[2011]
LAUREN CLAY, Associate Professor of History
B.A. (Princeton 1994); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 2003) [2008]
AMANDA CLAYTON, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Redlands 2007); M.A., Ph.D. (Washington University 2010, 2014)
[2015]
JAY B. CLAYTON IV, William R. Kenan, Jr., Professor of English; Professor
of Cinema and Media Arts; Director of the Curb Center
B.A. (Yale 1974); Ph.D. (Virginia 1979) [1988]
KEITH N. CLAYTON, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Southern Methodist 1956, 1957); Ph.D. (Northwestern
1960) [1960]
COREY M. CLEEK, Adjunct Professor of Managerial Studies
B.S. (Tennessee 1995); M.B.A. (Duke 2000) [2009]
DAVID E. CLIFFEL, Professor of Chemistry; Associate Professor of
Pediatrics; Chair of the Department of Chemistry
B.E.E., B.S. (Dayton 1988, 1988); Ph.D. (Texas 1998) [2000]
JOSHUA CLINTON, Abby and Jon Winkelried Chair; Professor of Political
Science
B.A. (Rochester 1996); M.A., M.S., Ph.D. (Stanford 2000, 2001, 2003)
[2009]
JULIA PHILLIPS COHEN, Associate Professor of Jewish Studies;
Associate Professor of History
B.A. (California, Davis 2001); Ph.D. (Stanford 2008) [2008]
WILLIAM J. COLLINS, Terence E. Adderley, Jr., Professor of Economics;
Professor of History
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Harvard 1993, 1995, 1998) [1998]
MATTHEW CONGDON, Senior Lecturer in Philosophy
B.A. (Skidmore 2005); M.A., Ph.D. (New School for Social Research
2008, 2014) [2014]
PAUL K. CONKIN, Distinguished Professor of History, Emeritus
B.A. (Milligan 1951); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1953, 1957) [1979]
BETH ANN CONKLIN, Associate Professor of Anthropology; Chair of
Anthropology
A.B. (Colorado College 1976); M.A. (Iowa 1980); Ph.D. (California, San
Francisco 1980) [1991]
JOHN P. CONLEY, Professor of Economics
B.A. (Chicago 1984); M.A., Ph.D. (Rochester 1987, 1990) [2002]
ANN JENNALIE COOK, Professor of English, Emerita
B.A., M.A. (Oklahoma 1956, 1959); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1972) [1976]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
TIMOTHY J. COOPER, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics; Assistant
Professor of Psychology; Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (Christian Brothers 1986); M.A. (Middle Tennessee State 1992);
Psy.D. (Spalding 1999) [2006]
AMY B. COOTER, Senior Lecturer in Sociology
B.A. (Vanderbilt 2005); Ph.D. (Michigan 2013) [2013]
BLYTHE ANNE CORBETT, Associate Professor of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences; Associate Professor of Psychology
M.A., Ph.D. (California School of Professional Psychology 1996, 1999)
[2010]
DANIEL B. CORNFIELD, Professor of Sociology; Professor of American
Studies
A.B., A.M., Ph.D. (Chicago 1974, 1977, 1980) [1980]
ELIZABETH R. COVINGTON, Senior Lecturer in English
B.A. (Iowa 1998); M.A.R. (Yale 2002); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007,
2011) [2011]
PAULA HATTOX COVINGTON, Latin American and Iberian Bibliographer;
Senior Lecturer in Latin American Studies
B.A. (Syracuse 1969); M.L.S. (Peabody 1971); M.A. (Vanderbilt 1994)
[1983]
RONALD L. COWAN, Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences;
Professor of Psychology; Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences
B.S. (Christian Brothers 1984); Ph.D. (UT Health Science Center
[Tennessee] 1990); M.D. (Cornell 1994) [2002]
JEFFERSON R. COWIE, James G. Stahlman Chair in American History;
Professor of History
B.A. (California, Berkeley 1987); Ph.D. (North Carolina 1997) [2015]
KATHERINE B. CRAWFORD, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
History; Director of Women’s and Gender Studies
B.A. (Columbia College 1988); M.S., Ph.D. (Chicago 1991, 1997)
[1999]
NICOLE CREANZA, Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences
A.B. (Harvard 2004); Ph.D. (Rockefeller 2011) [2016]
PHILIP S. CROOKE III, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus; Research
Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Stevens Institute of Technology 1966); Ph.D. (Cornell 1970) [1970]
YIFAT CROUVI, Lecturer in Hebrew
B.Ed. (Tel Aviv [Israel] 1993); M.Ed. ( 2002) [2016]
MARIO J. CRUCINI, Professor of Economics
B.A. (Western Ontario [Canada] 1985); M.A., Ph.D. (Rochester 1989,
1991) [1999]
STEVEN E. CSORNA, Associate Professor of Physics
B.S. (New York 1968); M.A., Ph.D. (Columbia 1970, 1974) [1977]
WILLIAM W. DAMON, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.S. (Purdue 1965); M.B.A., Ph.D. (Cornell 1967, 1970) [1976]
KATE DANIELS, Professor of English; Director of Creative Writing
B.A., M.A. (Virginia 1975, 1977); M.F.A. (Columbia 1980) [1995]
SIMON DARROCH, Assistant Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences
B.Sc. (Durham [U.K.] 2005); M.Sc. (Tokyo [Japan] 2008); Ph.D. (Yale
2015) [2015]
ANDREW F. DAUGHETY, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of
Economics; Professor of Law
B.S. (Case Institute of Technology 1969); M.S., Ph.D. (Case Western
Reserve 1971, 1972); M.A. (Southern California 1975) [1995]
CHRISTOPHER JASON DAVIES, Lecturer in Philosophy; Pre-major
Academic Advisor
B.A. (New College of Florida 2007); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2013) [2013]
DENISE DIANE DAVIS, Associate Professor of the Practice of Psychology
B.S. (Florida State 1977); Ph.D. (South Carolina, Aiken 1982) [1992]
JOAN COLIN DAYAN, Robert Penn Warren Professor of the Humanities;
Professor of Law; Professor of American Studies
B.A. (Smith 1974); Ph.D. (City University of New York 1980) [2004]
ANA VIDES DE ANDRADE, Senior Lecturer in Economics; Associate
Director of the Graduate Program in Economic Development
B.A. (Universidad Jose Simeon Canas [El Salvador] 1983); M.A., Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 1990, 1998) [2003]

225
NATHALIE A. DEBRAUWERE-MILLER, Associate Professor of French;
Associate Professor of Jewish Studies
D.E.U.G. (Sorbonne Nouvelle, Paris III [France] 1988); Licence, Maitrise
(Paris-Sorbonne [France] 1989, 1989); D.E.A. (Sorbonne Nouvelle,
Paris III [France] 1991); Ph.D. (Emory 2000) [2001]
PATRICK DEGUIRA, Lecturer in Art
B.F.A. (Memphis College of Art 1994); M.F.A. (Vermont College 2016)
[2016]
SARAH DELASSUS, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (Albright 1997); M.A. (Virginia 1999) [2001]
ARTHUR A. DEMAREST, Ingram Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Tulane 1974); A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard 1977, 1981) [1983]
SUSAN ANN DEMAY, Principal Senior Lecturer in Art
B.A. (Eckerd 1977); M.S. (Peabody 1979); M.A. (Tennessee
Technological 1989) [1980]
LARISA GRAWE DESANTIS, Assistant Professor of Earth and
Environmental Sciences; Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences
B.S. (California, Berkeley 2000); M.E.M. (Yale 2003); Ph.D. (Florida
2009) [2009]
DANIELA D’EUGENIA, Senior Lecturer in Italian
B.A. (Chieti [Italy] 2007); M.A. (Florence [Italy] 2009); M.A. (Padua [Italy]
2009); M. Phil. (City University of New York 2015) Ph.D. (City University
of New York 2017) [2017]
EMMANUELE DIBENEDETTO, Centennial Professor of Mathematics;
Professor of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics
B.A. (Florence [Italy] 1975); Ph.D. (Texas 1979) [2000]
RORY COOKE DICKER, Senior Lecturer in Women’s and Gender Studies;
Director of Margaret Cuninggim Women’s Center
B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1994, 1998) [1998]
DENNIS C. DICKERSON, Reverend James M. Lawson Chair in History;
Professor of Divinity School
B.A. (Lincoln [Illinois] 1971); M.A., Ph.D. (Washington University 1974,
1978); M.Div. (Vanderbilt 2007) [1999]
MARGARET AVERY DICKINS DE GIRON, Senior Lecturer in Latin
American Studies; Executive Director of the Center for Latin American
Studies
B.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1990, 2008) [2009]
NATHALIE DIEU-PORTER, Principal Senior Lecturer in French; Director of
the Center for Second Language Studies
B.A., D.E.A. (Mons-Hainaut [Belgium] 1989, 1996) [1997]
TOM D. DILLEHAY Rebecca Webb Wilson University Distinguished
Professor of Anthropology; Professor of Religion and Culture
B.A. (North Texas 1970); Ph.D. (Texas 1976) [2004]
ROBERT V. DILTS, Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus
B.A. (Wesleyan 1951); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1953, 1954) [1960]
MARCELO DISCONZI, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.Sc., M.S., M.S. (Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul [Brazil]
2002, 2005, 2005); Ph.D. (SUNY, Stony Brook 2012) [2012]
ANITA DISNEY, Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Australian National 1998); Ph.D. (New York 2005) [2014]
IDIT DOBBS-WEINSTEIN, Associate Professor of Philosophy; Associate
Professor of Jewish Studies
B.A., M.A. (York [Canada] 1981, 1982); M.A., Ph.D. (Toronto [Canada]
1983, 1987) [1987]
KENT DOLEZAL, Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.S. (Montana State, Havre 1995); M.P.A. (Minnesota 2009); Ph.D.
(Southern Illinois 2016) [2016]
LISA DORDAL, Lecturer in English
B.A. (Wooster 1986); M.Div., M.F.A. (Vanderbilt 2005, 2011) [2011]
BONNIE J. DOW, Professor of Communication Studies; Dean of
Humanities, College of Arts and Science.
B.A. (Baylor 1985); M.A. (Kansas 1987); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1990) [2006]
SPENCER DOWDALL, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
M.S., M.S., B.A. (Michigan 2006, 2006, 2006); M.S., Ph.D. (Chicago
2007, 2011) [2015]
ROBERT DREWS, Professor of Classics, Emeritus
B.A. (Northwestern College 1956); M.A. (Missouri 1957); Ph.D. (Johns
Hopkins 1960) [1961]
ROBERT A. DRISKILL, Professor of Economics
B.S. (Michigan State 1973); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1978) [1992]

A&S

226
ALEX DUBILET, Senior Lecturer in English; Senior Lecturer in Political
Science
B.A. (Pennsylvania 2006); M.Phil. (Cambridge [U.K.] 2007); Ph.D.
(California, Berkeley 2014) [2015]
AVA DENISE DUE-GOODWIN, Principal Senior Lecturer in Biological
Sciences
B.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1980); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1984,
1992) [2000]
ANDREW DUSTAN, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (Oklahoma 2007); M.A. (Miami [Ohio] 2008); Ph.D. (California,
Berkeley 2014) [2014]
SOURISH DUTTA, Senior Lecturer in Physics
B.S. (Calcutta [India] 1996); M.B.A., Ph.D. (Case Western Reserve
2002, 2007) [2007]
MARSHALL C. EAKIN, Professor of History; Professor of American Studies
B.A., M.A. (Kansas 1975, 1977); Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1981)
[1983]
TONY LEE EARLEY, Samuel Milton Fleming Professor of English
B.A. (Warren Wilson 1983); M.F.A. (Alabama, Huntsville 1992) [1997]
MARKUS EBERL, Associate Professor of Anthropology
M.A. (Bonn [Germany] 1999); Ph.D. (Tulane 2007) [2009]
JON S. EBERT, Associate Professor of Clinical Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences; Associate Clinical Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Bethel University [Minnesota] 1995); M.A. (Trinity International
1998); M.A., Psy.D. (Wheaton 2000, 2003) [2008]
FORD F. EBNER, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
D.V.M. (Washington State 1958); Ph.D. (Maryland 1965) [1991]
PAUL H. EDELMAN, Professor of Mathematics and Law; Professor of Law
B.A. (Swarthmore 1976); Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1980) [2000]
BENJAMIN EDEN, Professor of Economics
Ph.D. (Chicago 1975) [2002]
DOUGLAS D. EDWARDS, Lecturer in Managerial Studies
Certificate (Belmont );B.A. (Iowa 1996); M.B.A. (Vanderbilt 2010) [2015]
ROBERT R. EHMAN, Professor of Philosophy, Emeritus
B.A. (Pomona 1957); M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1959, 1961) [1967]
BRANDT F. EICHMAN, Professor of Biological Sciences; Professor of
Biochemistry
B.S. (Mississippi 1993); Ph.D. (Oregon State 2000) [2004]
M ISSAM EIDO, Senior Lecturer in Religious Studies
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Damascus [Syria] 2000, 2006, 2010) [2015]
W. PAUL ELLEDGE, Professor of English, Emeritus
B.A. (Missouri 1960); M.A., Ph.D. (Tulane 1962, 1965) [1964]
MARK N. ELLINGHAM, Professor of Mathematics
B.S., M.S. (Melbourne [Australia] 1981, 1983); Ph.D. (Waterloo
[Canada] 1986) [1986]
LYNN E. ENTERLINE, Nancy Perot Chair in English
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1978);B.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1981); M.A., Ph.D. (Cornell
1986, 1989) [1997]
JAMES A. EPSTEIN, Distinguished Professor of History
B.A. (Sussex [U.K.] 1970); Ph.D. (Birmingham [U.K.] 1977) [1986]
MIRIAM MARTIN ERICKSON, Lecturer in History; Pre-major Academic
Advisor
B.A. (Lipscomb 2002); M.A. (Saint John’s [Maryland] 2007); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2015) [2015]
VIVECA ERLANDSSON, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S., M.A. (San Francisco State 2005, 2006); Ph.D. (City University of
New York 2013) [2017]
DAVID J. ERNST, Professor of Physics
S.B., Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1965, 1970) [1992]
Christy L. Erving, Assistant Professor of Sociology
B.A. (Rice 2007); M.A., Ph.D. (Indiana 2009, 2014) [2017]
ELIZABETH CHRISTIN ESSIN, Associate Professor of Theatre
B.A. (Wake Forest 1993); M.A. (Northwestern 1998); Ph.D. (Texas
2006) [2011]
JOSEPH H. ESTES, Lecturer in Managerial Studies
B.S. (Vanderbilt 1981); M.B.A. (Pennsylvania 1985) [2017]
HERALDO FALCONI, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (George Mason 1997); M.A. (Virginia 1999) [2001]

vanderbilt university
JENNIFER FAY, Associate Professor of Cinema and Media Arts; Director of
Cinema and Media Arts
B.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1995, 2001)
[2010]
LEONARD C. FELDMAN, Stevenson Professor of Physics, Emeritus;
Adjoint Professor of Materials Science and Engineering
B.A. (Drew 1961); M.S., Ph.D. (Rutgers 1963, 1967) [1995]
STEPHEN W. FESIK, Orrin H. Ingram II Chair in Cancer Research;
Professor of Biochemistry; Professor of Chemistry; Professor of
Pharmacology
B.A. (College of the Holy Cross 1975); Ph.D. (Connecticut 1981) [2009]
JULIA ANN FESMIRE, Principal Senior Lecturer in English and Women’s
and Gender Studies
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1978);J.D. (Tennessee 1981); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
1989, 1994) [1994]
GERALD FIGAL, Professor of History; Professor of Asian Studies; Director
of Asian Studies
B.A. (California, Santa Barbara 1985); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1988,
1992) [2003]
ELSA FILOSA, Assistant Professor of Italian
Ph.D. (North Carolina 2005) [2007]
T. ALDRICH FINEGAN, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.A. (Claremont McKenna College 1951); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1953,
1960) [1964]
EDWARD F. FISCHER, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
Anthropology; Professor of American Studies; Director of the Center for
Latin American Studies
B.A. (Alabama, Huntsville 1989); M.A., Ph.D. (Tulane 1995, 1995)
[1996]
EARL E. FITZ, Professor of Portuguese, Spanish and Comparative
Literature
B.A., M.A. (Iowa 1968, 1970); M.A. (City University of New York,
Queens College 1973); Ph.D. (CUNY 1977) [1998]
LEONARD FOLGARAIT, Distinguished Professor of History of Art;
Professor of English
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1972, 1975, 1980) [1981]
WILLIAM R. FOWLER, JR., Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Las Americas [Mexico] 1972); M.A., Ph.D. (Calgary [Canada]
1977, 1982) [1987]
ROBERT FOX, JR., Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A., Ph.D. (Cincinnati 1957, 1963) [1963]
PHILLIP FRANCK, Associate Professor of Theatre
B.A. (Puget Sound 1990); M.F.A. (Northwestern 1998) [1998]
WILLIAM FRANKE, Professor of Comparative Literature and Italian
B.A. (Williams 1978); M.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1980); M.A. (California,
Berkeley 1988); Ph.D. (Stanford 1991) [1991]
JIMMIE L. FRANKLIN, Professor of History, Emeritus
B.A. (Jackson State 1961); M.A., Ph.D. (Oklahoma 1964, 1968) [1986]
JEFFERY J. FRANKS, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.S. (Michigan State 1966); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1970) [1970]
EDWARD H. FRIEDMAN, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of
Spanish; Director of the Robert Penn Warren Center for the Humanities
B.A. (Virginia 1970); M.A., Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1971, 1974) [2000]
KATHERINE L. FRIEDMAN, Associate Professor of Biological Sciences
B.A. (Carleton College 1990); Ph.D. (University of Washington 1996)
[2001]
MARILYN FRIEDMAN, W. Alton Jones Chair in Philosophy, Emerita
A.B. (Washington University 1967); Ph.D. (Western Ontario [Canada]
1974) [2009]
MARC G. FROMENT-MEURICE, Professor of French, Emeritus
M.A. (Paris X [France] 1975); Ph.D. (Paris VIII [France] 1979); Ph.D.
(Nice, Sophia-Antipolis [France] 1992) [1996]
VIVIEN GREEN FRYD, Professor of History of Art; Professor of American
Studies
B.A., M.A. (Ohio State 1974, 1977); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1984) [1985]
DANIEL J. FUNK, Associate Professor of Biological Sciences
B.S. (Notre Dame 1989); Ph.D. (Stony Brook 1996) [2000]
DAVID JON FURBISH, Professor of Earth and Environmental Sciences;
Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (North Carolina 1978); M.S. (California State 1981); Ph.D.
(Colorado 1985) [2003]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
DAVID H. FURSE, Adjunct Professor of Managerial Studies
A.B. (Georgia 1965); M.S. (Illinois, Champaign 1967); Ph.D. (Georgia
State 1974) [2002]
KATHY L. GACA, Associate Professor of Classical and Mediterranean
Studies
B.A., M.A. (Illinois, Champaign ); Ph.D. (Toronto [Canada] 1996) [1997]
GEORGE EDWARD GAFFNEY, Senior Lecturer in Classical and
Mediterranean Studies, Retired
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1970, 1974, 1976) [2014]
MEGAN E. GALLAGHER, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Vassar 2005); M.A., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 2008, 2017)
[2017]
STUART GARBER, Adjunct Professor of Managerial Studies
B.S. (Trevecca Nazarene 1988); M.B.A. (Vanderbilt 1994) [2010]
VICTORIA C. GARDNER, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (Delta State 1989); M.A. (Hawaii, Honolulu 1999); Ph.D. (Boston
College 2009) [2006]
ISABEL GAUTHIER, David K. Wilson Chair in Psychology; Professor of
Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.A. (Quebec [Canada] 1993); M.S., Ph.D. (Yale 1995, 1998) [1999]
VOLNEY P. GAY, Professor of Religious Studies; Professor of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences; Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Reed 1970); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1973, 1976) [1979]
JOHN G. GEER, Vice Provost for Academic and Strategic Affairs; Gertrude
Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of Political Science; Professor of Public
Policy and Education
B.A. (Franklin and Marshall 1980); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1982, 1986)
[1995]
JAY GELLER, Associate Professor of Modern Jewish Culture; Associate
Professor of Jewish Studies
B.A. (Wesleyan 1975); A.M., Ph.D. (Duke 1980, 1985) [1994]
DANIEL J. GERVAIS, Professor of Law; Professor of French; Director,
Vanderbilt Intellectual Property Program; Co-Director, LL.M. Program
Diploma (Jean-de-Brébeuf [Canada] 1981); LL.B., LL.M. (Montreal
[Canada] 1984, 1987); Diploma (Geneva [Switzerland] 1989); Doctor in
(Nantes [France] 1998) [2008]
MALCOLM GETZ, Associate Professor of Economics
B.A. (Williams 1967); Ph.D. (Yale 1973) [1973]
HOJJATALLAH GHANDI, Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.S. (Tehran Polytechnic [Iran] 1994); M.S. (Institute for Research in
Planning and Development [Iran] 2000); Ph.D. (Virginia Polytechnic
Institute 2009) [2015]
JACK P. GIBBS, Centennial Professor of Sociology, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Texas Christian 1950, 1952); Ph.D. (Oregon 1957) [1978]
KATHERINE A. GIFFORD, Assistant Professor of Neurology; Assistant
Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Skidmore 2002); M.S., Psy.D. (Florida Institute of Technology
2007, 2010) [2013]
LESLEY GILL, Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Macalester 1977); M.A., M.Phil., Ph.D. (Columbia 1978, 1980,
1984) [2008]
JONATHAN M. GILLIGAN, Associate Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences; Associate Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.A. (Swarthmore 1982); Ph.D. (Yale 1991) [1994]
SAM B. GIRGUS, Professor of English
A.B. (Syracuse 1962); M.A. (Iowa 1963); Ph.D. (New Mexico 1972)
[1990]
SUZANNE GLOBETTI, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Virginia 1991); Ph.D. (Texas 2002) [2004]
TERESA A. GODDU, Associate Professor of English; Associate Professor
of American Studies
B.A. (Yale 1986); M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1988, 1991) [1991]
GILI GOLAN, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.Sc., M.Sc., Ph.D. (Bar-Ilan [Israel] 2008, 2011, 2015) [2015]
RICHARD R. GOLDBERG, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.S. (Northwestern 1951); A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard 1952, 1956) [1976]
STEVEN L. GOODBRED, JR., Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences; Chair of Earth and Environmental Sciences
B.A. (Boston University 1991); M.S. (South Florida 1994); Ph.D. (William
and Mary 1999) [2005]

227
LENN E. GOODMAN, Andrew W. Mellon Professor of the Humanities;
Professor of Philosophy; Professor of Jewish Studies
A.B. (Harvard 1965); Ph.D. (Oxford [U.K.] 1968) [1994]
ANDREW GOODMAN-BACON, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (Macalester 2005); Ph.D. (Michigan 2014) [2016]
ALICE GOODYEAR, Associate Professor of the Practice of Managerial
Studies, Retired
B.A. (Skidmore 1973); M.B.A. (Denver 1976) [2008]
REYNA L. GORDON, Assistant Professor of Otolaryngology; Assistant
Professor of Psychology
B.M. (Southern California 2001); M.S. (Université de Provence [France]
2004); Ph.D. (Florida Atlantic 2010) [2015]
JOHN C. GORE, University Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Hertha Ramsey Cress Chair in Medicine; Professor of
Physics and Astronomy; Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Professor of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics; Director, Institute of
Imaging Science
B.Sc. (Manchester [U.K.] 1972); Ph.D. (London [U.K.] 1976);B.A.
(Ealing College [U.K.] 1983) [2002]
ROY K. GOTTFRIED, Professor of English
M.A., B.A. (Brown 1970, 1970); Ph.D. (Yale 1976) [1975]
MATTHEW I. GOULD, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.S. (CUNY 1963); M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania State 1965, 1967) [1966]
WALTER R. GOVE, Professor of Sociology, Emeritus
B.S. (SUNY, Syracuse 1960); M.A., Ph.D. (University of Washington
1967, 1968) [1968]
TODD R. GRAHAM, Professor of Biological Sciences; Professor of Cell
and Developmental Biology
B.S. (Maryville 1984); Ph.D. (Saint Louis 1988) [1992]
EMILY GREBLE, Associate Professor Germanic and Slavic Languages;
Associate Professor of History; Associate Professor of European
Studies
B.A. (William and Mary 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 2004, 2007) [2017]
SENTA VICTORIA GREENE, Stevenson Chair in Physics
A.B. (Tennessee 1984); M.Phil., M.S., Ph.D. (Yale 1987, 1987, 1993)
[1994]
THOMAS A. GREGOR, Professor of Anthropology, Emeritus
B.A. (Chicago 1962); Ph.D. (Columbia 1969) [1975]
DEREK MACGREGOR GRIFFITH, Associate Professor of Medicine, Health,
and Society; Associate Professor of Medicine; Associate Professor of
Health Policy
B.A. (Maryland 1993); M.A., Ph.D. (DePaul 1998, 2002) [2012]
DIANA GRISANTI, Writer-in-Residence in Theatre
B.A. (Iowa 2001); M.F.A. (Texas 2012) [2016]
ERIKA D. GRUNDSTROM, Senior Lecturer in Physics and Astronomy
B.S., B.S. (Minnesota 2000, 2001); M.S., Ph.D. (Georgia State 2006,
2007) [2007]
MICHELLE S. GRUNDY, Assistant Professor of Medical Education and
Administration (VU); Director of Health Professions Advice
B.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1993, 2000) [2002]
GUILHERME GUALDA, Associate Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences
B.Sc., B.Sc., M.Sc. (Sao Paulo [Brazil] 1999, 1999, 2001); Ph.D.
(Chicago 2007) [2007]
ANNA GUENGERICH, Senior Lecturer in Anthropology
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 2006, 2009, 2014) [2015]
YINGHUI GUO, Lecturer in Asian Studies
M.A. (Inner Mongolia, IMAR [China] 2002); D.A. (Zhejiang [China] 2008)
[2009]
ALFREDO GURROLA, Assistant Professor of Physics
B.S., Ph.D. (Texas A&M 2005, 2011) [2011]
FEDERICO H. GUTIERREZ, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (Universidad Nacional de Cuyo [Argentina] 2002); M.A., M.Phil.,
Ph.D. (Yale 2007, 2008, 2011) [2011]
TROY A. HACKETT, Professor of Hearing and Speech Sciences; Associate
Professor of Psychology
B.A., M.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1987, 1989); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1996)
[2000]

A&S

228
RICHARD F. HAGLUND, JR., Stevenson Professor of Physics
B.A. (Wesleyan 1967); M.A. (Stony Brook 1968); Ph.D. (North Carolina
1975) [1984]
BARBARA HAHN, Max Kade Foundation Chair in German Studies;
Professor of German
Ph.D. (Freie Universitat Berlin [Germany] 1989);Habilitation (Hamburg
[Germany] 1993) [2004]
WILLIAM BEARDALL HALE, Lecturer in Sociology
B.S. (Florida State 2005); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2009, 2013) [2017]
LEOR HALEVI, Associate Professor of History; Associate Professor of Law
B.A. (Princeton 1994); M.A. (Yale 1996); Ph.D. (Harvard 2002) [2008]
DENNIS G. HALL, Professor of Physics, Emeritus
B.S. (Illinois, Champaign 1970); M.S. (Southern Illinois 1972); Ph.D.
(Tennessee 1976) [2000]
LARRY C. HALL, Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus
B.A. (Bowling Green State 1952); Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1956)
[1956]
JON W. HALLQUIST, Associate Professor of Theatre
B.S. (Nebraska Wesleyan 1977); A.M., Ph.D. (Michigan 1979, 1985)
[1985]
TERRYL W. HALLQUIST, Associate Professor of Theatre
B.S. (Nebraska Wesleyan 1977); A.M., Ph.D. (Michigan 1979, 1985)
[1985]
JOHN W. HALPERIN, Centennial Professor of English, Emeritus
A.B. (Bowdoin 1963); M.A. (New Hampshire 1966); M.A., Ph.D. (Johns
Hopkins 1968, 1969) [1983]
BUSHRA J. HAMAD, Senior Lecturer in Religious Studies
B.A. (Khartoum [Sudan] 1954); M.A., Ph.D. (Texas 1986, 1992) [2006]
KIRSTEN L. HAMAN, Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences; Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychology
B.S. (Florida 1988); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1993, 2000) [2001]
CHARLES H. HAMBRICK, Professor of Religious Studies, Emeritus
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1952); B.D. (Drew 1959); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1967,
1971) [1968]
JOSEPH H. HAMILTON, Landon C. Garland Distinguished Professor of
Physics
B.S. (Mississippi 1954); M.S., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1956,
1958); D.Sc. (Mississippi 1982); Doctorate (Johann Wolfgang Goethe
[Germany] 1992); D.Phil. (hon., Bucharest [Romania] 1999); D.Phil.
(hon., St. Petersburg State [Russia] 2001); D.Phil. (hon., Joint Institute
for Nuclear Research [Russia] 2004); D.Phil. (hon., Shukla [India] 2006);
D.Sc. (hon., Berea 2007) [1958]
KEATON P. HAMM, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S., B.S., Ph.D. (Texas A&M 2010, 2010, 2015) [2015]
KAREN HAMMER, Senior Lecturer in Women’s and Gender Studies
B.F.A. (Tufts 1998); M.A. (Wyoming 2012); Ph.D. (City University of New
York 2017) [2017]
MOZHDEH AMELIA HAMRAIE, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Health,
and Society; Assistant Professor of American Studies
B.A., Ph.D. (Emory 2007, 2013) [2013]
M. DONALD HANCOCK, Professor of Political Science, Emeritus
B.A. (Texas 1961); M.A., Ph.D. (Columbia 1962, 1966) [1979]
TIMOTHY P. HANUSA, Professor of Chemistry
A.B. (Cornell 1978); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1983) [1985]
DOUGLAS P. HARDIN, Professor Mathematics; Professor of Biomedical
Informatics
B.E.E. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1980); M.E.E. (Stanford 1982);
Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1985) [1986]
ALISSA A. HARE, Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.S. (Calvin 2006); M.S., Ph.D. (Yale 2009, 2012) [2015]
ERWIN C. HARGROVE, JR., Professor of Political Science, Emeritus
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1953, 1954, 1963) [1976]
JANA HARPER, Associate Professor of the Practice of Art
M.F.A. (Arizona State 2001) [2013]
JOEL FRANCIS HARRINGTON, Centennial Chair in History; Chair of the
Department of History
B.A. (Notre Dame 1981); A.M., Ph.D. (Michigan 1983, 1989) [1989]
THOMAS M. HARRIS, Centennial Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus;
Research Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Rochester 1955); Ph.D. (Duke 1959) [1964]

vanderbilt university
T. S. Harvey, Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Christopher Newport 1996); M.A. (Old Dominion 1997); Ph.D.
(Virginia 2003) [2017]
FREDERICK R. HASELTON, Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Professor of Chemistry; Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual
Sciences
B.A. (Haverford 1969); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1981) [1989]
R. CHRIS HASSEL, JR., Professor of English, Emeritus
B.A. (Richmond 1961); M.A. (North Carolina 1962); Ph.D. (Emory 1968)
[1968]
F. HAMILTON HAZLEHURST, Professor of Fine Arts, Emeritus
B.A., M.F.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1949, 1952, 1956) [1963]
ANDREA LEIGH HEARN, Senior Lecturer in English; Director of CASPAR
B.A., M.A. (Tulsa 1997, 1999); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2005) [2005]
STEPHAN HECKERS, William P. and Henry B. Test Chair in Schizophrenia
Research; Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; Professor
of Psychology; Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences; Chair
of the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
M.D. (Cologne [Germany] 1988); M.Sc. (Harvard 2000) [2006]
CAROLYN J. HEINRICH, Patricia and Rodes Hart Chair; Professor of
Public Policy and Education; Professor of Economics
B.A. (Beloit 1989); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1991, 1995) [2015]
ARNOLD M. HEISER, Professor of Physics and Astronomy, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1954, 1957); Ph.D. (Chicago 1961)
[1961]
CHALENE HELMUTH, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (Asbury 1986); M.A., Ph.D. (Kentucky, Lexington 1988, 1991)
[2003]
ROBERT LOUIS HEMMINGER, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.S. (Greenville 1957); M.S. (California State, San Diego 1959); Ph.D.
(Michigan State 1963) [1963]
CLINT HENDRIX, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (Transylvania 1998); M.A. (Miami [Ohio] 2001); Ph.D. (Kansas
2006) [2006]
EUN JEONG HEO, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A., M.A. (Seoul National [Korea] 2004, 2006); Ph.D. (Rochester 2012)
[2013]
SUZANA HERCULANO, Associate Professor of Psychology; Associate
Professor of Biological Sciences
B.S. (Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro [Brazil] 1992); M.A. (Case
Western Reserve 1995); Ph.D. (Université Pierre et Marie Curie [France]
1998) [2016]
DAVID M. HERCULES, Centennial Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus;
Research Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Juniata 1954); Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1957) [1994]
B. ANDES HESS, JR., Professor of Chemistry
B.A. (Williams 1962); M.S., Ph.D. (Yale 1963, 1966) [1968]
DAVID J. HESS, James Thornton Fant Chair in Sustainability Studies;
Professor of Sociology
M.A. (Cornell );B.A. (Harvard ); Ph.D. (Cornell 1987) [2011]
MARC J. HETHERINGTON, Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Pittsburgh 1990); Ph.D. (Texas 1997) [2004]
STEPHANIE HIGGS, Lecturer in English
B.A. (Washington University 2006); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2010, 2016)
[2017]
RUTH HILL, Andrew W. Mellon Chair in the Humanities; Professor of
Spanish
B.A. (Northwestern 1988); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan 1991, 1994) [2012]
RICK HILLES, Associate Professor of English
B.A. (Kent State 1991); M.F.A. (Columbia 1995) [2005]
JULIAN F. HILLYER, Associate Professor of Biological Sciences; Director of
the Program in Career Development
B.A. (Chicago 1996); M.S., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1999, 2004) [2007]
C. ELTON HINSHAW, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.B.A. (Baylor 1958); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1967) [1966]
JONATHAN T. HISKEY, Associate Professor of Political Science; Vice Chair
of Political Science
B.A. (North Carolina 1989); M.A. (Florida International 1993); M.A.,
Ph.D. (Pittsburgh 1995, 1999) [2005]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
JESSIE HOCK, Assistant Professor of English
B.A. (Barnard 2005); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2015) [2015]
MICHAEL P. HODGES, Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (William and Mary 1963); M.A., Ph.D. (Virginia 1966, 1967) [1970]
Kari L. Hoffman, Associate Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Rice 1997); Ph.D. (Arizona 2003) [2017]
J. KELLY HOLLEY-BOCKELMANN, Associate Professor of Physics and
Astronomy; Director of the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge
Program
B.S. (Montana State 1993); M.S., Ph.D. (Michigan 1995, 1999) [2007]
STEVEN D. HOLLON, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of
Psychology; Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (George Washington 1971); M.S., Ph.D. (Florida State 1974, 1977)
[1985]
WILLIAM R. HOLMES, Assistant Professor of Physics
B.S. (Tennessee 2005); M.A., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 2007, 2010)
[2015]
FARRAR HOOD CUSOMATO, Senior Lecturer in Art
B.A. (University of the South 1998); M.S., M.F.A. (Pratt Institute 2006,
2006) [2011]
GEORGE M. HORNBERGER, University Distinguished Professor of
Civil and Environmental Engineering and Earth and Environmental
Science; Craig E. Philip Chair in Engineering; Professor of Earth and
Environmental Sciences; Director of VIEE
B.S., M.S.E. (Drexel 1965, 1967); Ph.D. (Stanford 1970) [2008]
MARK HOSFORD, Associate Professor of Art; Interim Chair of the
Department of Art
B.F.A. (Kansas 1998); M.F.A. (Tennessee 2001) [2001]
VALERIE HOTCHKISS, University Librarian; Professor of English
B.A. (Cincinnati 1982); M.L.S. (Southern Connecticut State 1984); M.A.,
M.Phil., Ph.D. (Yale 1987, 1988, 1990) [2016]
CLIFF J. HUANG, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.A. (Tunghai [Taiwan] 1961); M.A. (National Taiwan 1964); Ph.D. (North
Carolina 1968) [1969]
XIAODONG KEVIN HUANG, Professor of Economics
Ph.D. (Minnesota 1998) [2006]
JAMES HUDNUT-BEUMLER, Anne Potter Wilson Distinguished Professor
of American Religious History; Professor of History
B.A. (Wooster 1980); M.Div. (Union Theological Seminary, New York
1983); Ph.D. (Princeton 1989) [2000]
GREGORY W. HUFFMAN, Professor of Economics
B.A. (Saskatchewan [Canada] 1979); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1983) [2001]
C. BRUCE HUGHES, Professor of Mathematics
A.B. (Guilford 1976); M.A., Ph.D. (Kentucky, Lexington 1979, 1981)
[1985]
RACHEL JANE HUNDLEY, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics; Assistant
Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; Research Assistant
Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Harding 1996); M.S., Ph.D. (Memphis 1996, 2003) [2010]
LINDA BUFOR HUTCHISON, Senior Lecturer in Mathematics
B.A. (Lipscomb 1969); M.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1972) [1981]
M. SHANE HUTSON, Professor of Physics; Professor of Biological
Sciences; Chair of the Department of Physics and Astronomy
B.A., M.S. (Wake Forest 1992, 1993); Ph.D. (Virginia 2000) [2003]
YOSHIKUNI IGARASHI, Professor of History
B.A. (International Christian [Japan] 1985); M.A. (California, Berkeley
1989); Ph.D. (Chicago 1993) [1993]
SARAH IGO, Associate Professor of History; Associate Professor of Law;
Associate Professor of American Studies; Director of the American
Studies Program
A.B. (Harvard 1992); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1997, 2001) [2008]
David Harold Ikard, Professor of African American and Diaspora
Studies
B.A., M.A. (North Carolina State 1994, 1997); Ph.D. (Wisconsin,
Madison 2002) [2017]
ETTORE F. INFANTE, Professor of Mathematics and Dean of the College
of Arts and Science, Emeritus
B.A., B.S., Ph.D. (Texas 1958, 1959, 1962) [1997]

229
ATSUSHI INOUE, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of Economics
B.A. (Yokohama National [Japan] 1991); M.A. (Tokyo [Japan] 1993);
M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1995, 1998) [2014]
LARRY W. ISAAC, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of Sociology;
Professor of American Studies; Chair of the Department of Sociology
B.S., M.A. (Akron 1971, 1974); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1979)
[2004]
ALAN ITKIN, Senior Lecturer in German; Assistant Dean, College of Arts
and Science
B.A. (California, Berkeley 2000); M.A. (New York 2004); Ph.D. (Michigan
2011) [2016]
BORISLAV LUBOMIROV IVANOV, Lecturer in Chemistry
M.S., Ph.D. (Institute of Chemical Technology [Czech Republic] 1986,
1991) [2000]
LAUREN PARKER JACKSON, Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences;
Assistant Professor of Biochemistry
B.S. (Vanderbilt 2003); Ph.D. (Cambridge [U.K.] 2007) [2014]
ALEXANDER I. JACOBS, Lecturer in History
B.A. (Alaska, Anchorage 2005); M.A. (North Carolina 2008); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2016) [2016]
GARY A. JAEGER, Principal Senior Lecturer in Philosophy; Director of the
Writing Studio; Research Assistant Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1999); Ph.D. (Wisconsin, Milwaukee 2006) [2007]
JOHN WAYNE JANUSEK, Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.A., M.A. (Illinois, Champaign 1986, 1987); Ph.D. (Chicago 1994)
[1998]
MARK F. JARMAN, Centennial Professor of English
A.B. (California, Santa Cruz 1974); M.F.A. (Iowa 1976) [1983]
ANGELA L. JEFFERSON, Professor of Neurology; Professor of Medicine;
Associate Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Lynchburg 1997); M.A. (Loyola College [Maryland] 2000); Ph.D.
(Drexel 2003) [2012]
GARY F. JENSEN, Professor of Sociology, Emeritus
B.S. (Portland State 1966); M.A., Ph.D. (University of Washington 1968,
1972) [1989]
MELVIN D. JOESTEN, Professor Chemistry, Emeritus
B.S. (Northern Illinois 1954); M.S., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1959,
1962) [1966]
CHRISTOPHER M. S. JOHNS, Norman L. and Roselea J. Goldberg Chair
of Art History
B.A. (Florida State 1977); M.A., Ph.D. (Delaware 1980, 1985) [2003]
WILL E. JOHNS, Professor of Physics
B.S. (Illinois, Champaign 1987); Ph.D. (Colorado 1997) [1999]
ARTHUR JOHNSEN, Associate Professor of the Practice of Managerial
Studies, Retired
B.A. (Gettysburg 1965); M.B.A. (Virginia 1972) [2006]
CARL H. JOHNSON, Stevenson Chair in Biological Sciences; Professor of
Molecular Physiology and Biophysics
B.A. (Texas 1976); Ph.D. (Stanford 1982) [1987]
DAVID MATTHEW JOHNSON, Lecturer in Russian
B.A., M.A. (Saint Cloud State 1994, 2003); M.A. (Arizona 2008) [2008]
STACEY MARGARITA JOHNSON, Senior Lecturer in Spanish; Assistant
Director of Center for Teaching; Adjunct Assistant Professor
B.A. (Union [Tennessee] 1999); M.A., Certificate, Ed.D. (Memphis 2002,
2012, 2012) [2015]
JEFFREY N. JOHNSTON, Stevenson Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Xavier [Ohio] 1992); Ph.D. (Ohio State 1997) [2006]
CECIL D. JONES, JR., Professor of Theatre, Emeritus
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1951); M.A. (Northwestern 1952); Ph.D. (Illinois 1959
[1965]
MARTHA WEARE JONES, Associate Professor of Medicine, Health, and
Society
B.A., B.S. (Delaware 1976, 1976); M.P.A. (Princeton 1982); Ph.D.
(California, Berkeley 1996) [2012]
OWEN D. JONES, New York Alumni Chancellor’s Chair in Law; Professor
of Law; Professor of Biological Sciences
B.A. (Amherst 1985);J.D. (Yale 1991) [2004]
VAUGHAN JONES, Stevenson Distinguished Professor of Mathematics
B.Sc., M.Sc. (Auckland [New Zealand] 1972, 1973); Doctor in Science
(Université de Genève [Switzerland] 1979) [2011]

A&S

230
YOLLETTE TRIGG JONES, Associate Dean of the College of Arts and
Science; Senior Lecturer in History
A.B., A.M., Ph.D. (Duke 1977, 1978, 1985) [1989]
MARIA LUISA S.P. JORGE, Assistant Professor of Earth and
Environmental Sciences; Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences
B.S., M.Sci. (Sao Paulo [Brazil] 1996, 2000); Ph.D. (Illinois, Chicago
2007) [2007]
A. ARI JOSKOWICZ, Associate Professor of Jewish Studies; Associate
Professor of History; Associate Professor of European Studies; Director
of the Max Kade Center for European and German Studies
Ph.D. (Chicago 2008) [2009]
CATHY LOGIN JRADE, Professor of Spanish, Emerita
B.A. (CUNY 1969); A.M., Ph.D. (Brown 1971, 1974) [1987]
RAMON JRADE, Research Instructor in Sociology, Retired
B.A. (Providence College 1968); A.M., Ph.D. (Brown 1970, 1980)
[1987]
SCOTT JUENGEL, Senior Lecturer in English
B.A. (Tulsa 1986); M.A. (Columbia 1988); Ph.D. (Iowa 1997) [2010]
JON H. KAAS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Distinguished Professor of
Psychology; Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.A. (Northland 1959); Ph.D. (Duke 1965) [1972]
CINDY D. KAM, William R. Kenan, Jr., Chair; Professor of Political Science;
Professor of Medicine, Health, and Society; Professor of Psychology
A.B. (Princeton 1996); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan 2000, 2003) [2008]
CHRISTINA KARAGEORGOU-BASTEA, Associate Professor of Spanish
B.A. (National and Kapodistrian University of Athens [Greece] 1988);
M.A. (Veracruzana [Mexico] 1994); M.A., Ph.D. (El Colegio de México
1996, 1998) [2002]
GENNADI KASPAROV, Stevenson Professor of Mathematics
Ph.D. (Moscow State [Russia] 1974); Ph.D. (Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 1984) [2002]
MARTIN KATAHN, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
Mus.B. (Hartford 1958); M.A., Ph.D. (Syracuse 1960, 1962) [1962]
NEIL PATRICK KELLEY, Assistant Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences
B.A. (Oberlin 2003); Ph.D. (California, Davis 2012) [2013]
PATRICIA KELLY, Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.S. (Babson 1981); Ph.D. (Massachusetts 1994) [2002]
SHAUL KELNER, Associate Professor of Sociology and Jewish Studies
Ph.D. (CUNY 2002) [2005]
BRENTON KENKEL, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Kentucky, Lexington 2008); Ph.D. (Rochester 2014) [2014]
THOMAS W. KEPHART, Professor of Physics
B.S. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute 1971); M.S. (North Texas State
1975); Ph.D. (Northeastern 1981) [1985]
SUSAN K. KEVRA, Senior Lecturer in French
B.A. (Oberlin 1985); M.A. (Michigan 1988); Ph.D. (Massachusetts 1998)
[2001]
HYE-YOUNG KIM, Research Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Korea 1984); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1996, 1997) [1997]
SE YOUNG KIM, Mellon Assistant Professor of Cinema and Media Arts
B.A. (Kon Kuk [Korea] 2006); M.A. (Ohio 2010); Ph.D. (Iowa 2016)
[2016]
GARY KIMBALL, Associate Professor of the Practice of Managerial
Studies; Director of Managerial Studies
B.S., M.B.A. (Vanderbilt 1984, 1985) [2008]
CLAIRE SISCO KING, Associate Professor of Communication Studies;
Chair of the Department of Communication Studies
B.A. (Davidson 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 2001, 2006)
[2006]
JUDITH A. KLASS, Senior Lecturer in English and Jewish Studies
B.A. (Sarah Lawrence 1988); M.Phil., D.Phil. (Oxford [U.K.] 1990, 1998)
[2007]
OLIVER KNABE, Lecturer in German
B.A., M.A. (Freie Universitat Berlin [Germany] 2008, 2011); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2017) [2017]
JOHN P. KOCH, Senior Lecturer in Communication Studies; Associate
Director of Debate
B.A. (Capital 2004); M.A., Ph.D. (Wayne State 2011, 2016) [2016]

vanderbilt university
LUTZ KOEPNICK, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in German; Chair of
Department of German, Russian and East European Studies; Director
of Comparative Media Analysis and Practice
M.A. (Washington University 1990); Ph.D. (Stanford 1994) [2013]
NICOLLETTE MARIE KOSTIW, Senior Lecturer in Latin American Studies;
Assistant Director of the Center for Latin American Studies
B.A., M.A. (West Virginia 2005, 2007); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2015) [2015]
KASSIAN A. KOVALCHECK, JR., Professor of Communication Studies,
Emeritus
B.A. (Wabash 1965); M.A., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1967, 1972)
[1969]
ROBERT KRAL, Professor of Biology, Emeritus
B.S. (North Carolina State 1952); Ph.D. (Florida State 1959) [1965]
PAUL KRAMER, Associate Professor of History
M.A., B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1991, 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1994,
1998) [2009]
MICHAEL P. KREYLING, Professor of English, Emeritus
B.A. (Thomas More 1970); M.A., Ph.D. (Cornell 1974, 1975) [1985]
TARAH M. KUHN, Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences; Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychology
B.A. (CUNY, Hunter College 1994); M.A., Ph.D. (Adelphi 1998, 2003)
[2004]
WODEN KUSNER, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Haverford 2007); Ph.D. (Pittsburgh 2014) [2017]
KONSTANTIN V. KUSTANOVICH, Professor of Slavic Languages and
Literatures, Emeritus
M.S. (Leningrad Polytechnic Institute [Russia] 1969); M.A. (New York
1977); M.Phil., Ph.D. (Columbia 1983, 1986) [1987]
VERA M. KUTZINSKI, Martha Rivers Ingram Professor of English
B.A. (Smith 1979); M.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1981, 1982, 1985) [2004]
JOHN LACHS, Centennial Professor of Philosophy
B.A., M.A. (McGill [Canada] 1956, 1957); Ph.D. (Yale 1961) [1967]
PETER LAKE, Martha Rivers Ingram University Distinguished Professor
of History and the History of Christianity; Professor of the History of
Christianity
B.A., Ph.D. (Cambridge [U.K.] 1973, 1978) [2008]
JONATHAN LAMB, Andrew W. Mellon Professor of the Humanities;
Professor of English
B.A., D.Phil. (York [U.K.] 1966, 1971) [2002]
JANE GILMER LANDERS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in History
A.B., M.A. (Miami 1968, 1974); Ph.D. (Florida 1988) [1992]
JOSEPH S. LAPPIN, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus; Research
Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Cincinnati 1962); Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1966) [1968]
RICHARD JAMES LARSEN, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.S. (Case Institute of Technology 1964); M.S., Ph.D. (Rutgers,
Camden 1966, 1970) [1970]
MICHAEL KRISTIAN LAWSON, Associate Professor of the Practice of
Managerial Studies
B.S. (Indiana State 1999); M.S. (Louisville 2003); Ph.D. (Middle
Tennessee State 2014) [2014]
KEVIN M. LEANDER, Associate Professor of Education; Associate
Professor of English
M.A. (Illinois, Champaign 1995);B.A. (Colorado 1995); Ph.D. (Illinois,
Champaign 1999) [1999]
PATRICK LEDDIN, Associate Professor of the Practice of Managerial
Studies
B.S. (Southern Illinois 1991); M.A. (Webster [Saint Louis] 1998); Ph.D.
(Kentucky, Lexington 2009) [2013]
MIREILLE LEE, Assistant Professor of History of Art
A.B. (Occidental 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Bryn Mawr 1994, 1999) [2008]
BENJAMIN LEGG, Senior Lecturer in Portuguese
B.A. (Massachusetts 2004); M.A., Ph.D. (Brown 2014, 2016) [2016]
P. GALEN LENHERT, Professor of Physics, Emeritus
B.A. (Wittenberg 1955); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1960) [1964]
GREGORY LEO, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.S. (Georgia Institute of Technology 2007); Ph.D. (California, Santa
Barbara 2015) [2015]
WALLACE M. LESTOURGEON, Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus
B.S., Ph.D. (Texas 1966, 1970) [1974]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
AMY-JILL LEVINE, University Professor of New Testament and Jewish
Studies; Mary Jane Werthan Professor of Jewish Studies; Professor of
Jewish Studies
A.B. (Smith 1978); A.M., Ph.D. (Duke 1981, 1984) [1994]
DAVID E. LEWIS, William R. Kenan, Jr., Professor of Political Science;
Professor of Law; Chair of the Department of Political Science
B.A. (California, Berkeley 1992); M.A. (Colorado 1996); M.A., Ph.D.
(Stanford 2000, 2000) [2008]
TONG LI, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of Economics
B.S. (University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 1988); Ph.D.
(California, San Diego 1993); Ph.D. (Southern California 1997) [2005]
PAUL LIM, Associate Professor of History of Christianity; Associate
Professor of History
B.A. (Yale 1990); M.Div. (Biblical Theological Seminary [Pennsylvania]
1995); Th.M. (Princeton Theological Seminary 1997); Ph.D. (Cambridge
[U.K.] 2001) [2006]
ODIE A. LINDSEY, Professor of the Practice of Medicine, Health, and
Society
B.A. (Tennessee 1994); M.F.A. (School of the Art Institute of Chicago
2004); M.A. (Mississippi 2007) [2014]
CRAIG W. LINDSLEY, William K. Warren, Jr., Chair in Medicine; Professor
of Pharmacology; Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (California State, Chico 1992); Ph.D. (California, Santa Barbara
1996) [2006]
ANDREW J. LINK, Associate Professor of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology; Associate Professor of Chemistry; Assistant Professor of
Biochemistry
B.S., B.A., M.A. (Washington University 1987, 1987, 1987); Ph.D.
(Harvard 1994) [1999]
ADAM LIST, Principal Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.S. (Valparaiso 1986); Ph.D. (Chicago 1991) [1999]
AMANDA GRISCOM LITTLE, Writer in Residence in English
B.A. (Brown 1996) [2012]
JING LIU, Senior Lecturer in Chinese
B.A. (Henan [China] 1981); M.A. (Shanxi Teachers [China] 1984) [2007]
XIANMIN LIU, Senior Lecturer in Chinese and Chinese Language Program
Coordinator
B.A. (Beijing Foreign Studies [China] 1983); M.A., Ph.D. (Minnesota
1988, 1995) [1999]
RICHARD DOUGLAS LLOYD, Associate Professor of Sociology
B.A. (California, Berkeley 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1995, 2002)
[2003]
GORDON D. LOGAN, Centennial Professor of Psychology
B.A., M.S. (Alberta [Canada] 1969, 1972); Ph.D. (McGill [Canada] 1975)
[2000]
TIMOTHY F. LOGAN, Adjunct Associate Professor of Managerial Studies
B.S. (McMurry 1985); M.B.A. (Southern Methodist 2005) [2006]
LORRAINE M. LOPEZ, Professor of English
B.A. (California State 1989); M.A., Ph.D. (Georgia 1997, 2000) [2002]
ALICIA LORENZO-GARCIA, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A., M.A. (Valladolid [Spain] 1985, 1993) [2003]
PETER LORGE, Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (Texas 1989); M.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1990); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania
1996) [2001]
CHRISTOPHER LOSS, Associate Professor of Public Policy and Higher
Education; Associate Professor of History
B.A. (Pennsylvania State 1994); M.A., M.A., Ph.D., Ph.D. (Virginia 2000,
2001, 2007, 2007) [2007]
BRYAN LOWE, Assistant Professor of Religious Studies
B.A. (Middlebury 2003); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2009, 2012) [2012]
MARY LEAH LOWE, Associate Professor of Theatre; Associate Professor
of American Studies; Chair of the Department of Theatre
A.B. (Oberlin 1985); M.F.A. (Minnesota 1988); Ph.D. (Florida State 2000)
[2011]
MICHIRU ICHIHARA LOWE, Senior Lecturer in Japanese
B.A. (Nanzan [Japan] 2002); M.A. (Columbia 2010) [2012]
HEATHER LUEA, Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.A. (Fort Hays State 1998); M.B.A. (Wichita State 2000); Ph.D.
(Kansas State 2005) [2009]

231
WILLIAM LUIS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of Spanish;
Director of the Latino and Latina Studies Program
B.A. (SUNY, Binghamton 1971); M.A. (Wisconsin 1973); M.A., Ph.D.
(Cornell 1979, 1980) [1991]
CHARLES M. LUKEHART, Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus; Research
Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Pennsylvania State 1968); Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 1972) [1973]
CHENYUN LUO, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.A. (Rochester 2011); M.A., Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 2012, 2017) [2017]
NOAM LUPU, Associate Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Columbia 2002); M.A. (Chicago 2005); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton
2008, 2011) [2016]
TORBEN LUTJEN, Visiting Associate Professor of European Studies and
Political Science
M.A., Ph.D. (Georg-August-Universität Göttingen [Germany] 2001,
2006) [2017]
TERRY P. LYBRAND, Professor of Chemistry; Professor of Pharmacology
B.S. (South Carolina 1980); Ph.D. (California, San Francisco 1984)
[2000]
JANET E. MACDONALD, Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (McGill [Canada] 2002); Ph.D. (Alberta [Canada] 2008) [2011]
KENNETH MACLEISH, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Health, and
Society
B.A. (Bard [New York] 2001); M.A., Ph.D. (Texas 2006, 2010) [2012]
CHARLES F. MAGUIRE, Professor of Physics, Emeritus
B.S. (Iona 1966); Ph.D. (Yale 1973) [1975]
ALEXANDER MAIER, Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.Sc., M.Sc. (Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität [Germany] 1999, 2002);
Dr.rer.nat. (Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen [Germany] 2005) [2011]
ANDREA E. MANESCHI, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1958); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1964) [1969]
H. CHARLES MANNING, Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Professor of
Neurological Surgery; Ingram Associate Professor of Cancer Research;
Associate Professor of Chemistry
B.Sc. (Tarleton State 2000); Ph.D. (Texas Tech University 2004) [2008]
DAVID MARANISS, Distinguished Visiting Professor of Political Science
[2013]
LEAH S. MARCUS, Edwin Mims Professor of English
B.A. (Carleton College 1967); M.A., Ph.D. (Columbia 1968, 1971)
[1997]
Michelle M. Marcus, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A., B.S., M.A. (Miami 2010, 2011); Ph.D. (Brown 2017) [2017]
LAWRENCE J. MARNETT, Dean of Basic Sciences; University Professor of
Biochemistry and Chemistry; Mary Geddes Stahlman Chair in Cancer
Research; Professor of Pharmacology
B.S. (Rockhurst 1969); Ph.D. (Duke 1973) [1989]
RENE MAROIS, Professor of Psychology; Associate Professor of
Radiology and Radiological Sciences; Chair of the Department of
Psychology
B.S. (McGill [Canada] 1986); M.S. (Dalhousie [Canada] 1989); Ph.D.
(Yale 1996) [1999]
LARRY MAY, Professor of Philosophy, Emeritus; Professor of Law
B.S. (Georgetown 1973); M.A., Ph.D. (New School for Social Research
1976, 1977);J.D. (Washington University 2000) [2009]
GIUSY MAZZONE, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
Bachelor, M.S. (Bari [Italy] 2006, 2008); Ph.D. (University of Salento
[Italy] 2012); Ph.D. (Pittsburgh 2016) [2016]
CLARE M. MCCABE, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of Chemical
and Biomolecular Engineering; Professor of Chemistry; Associate
Dean for the Office of Postdoctoral Affairs; Director, Graduate Studies,
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
B.S., Ph.D. (Sheffield [U.K.] 1995, 1998) [2004]
HOLLY J. MCCAMMON, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
Sociology; Professor of Human and Organization Development;
Professor of Law
B.A. (Purdue 1982); A.M., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1986, 1990)
[1990]

A&S

232
ELLIOTT MCCARTER, Senior Lecturer in Asian Studies
B.A. (North Carolina, Charlotte 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Texas 2005, 2013)
[2016]
JOHN A. MCCARTHY, Professor of German, Emeritus
B.A. (Oakland 1964); M.A., Ph.D. (SUNY, Buffalo 1967, 1972) [1991]
RICHARD CHARLES MCCARTY, Professor of Psychology
B.S., M.S. (Old Dominion 1970, 1972); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1976)
[2001]
GARY C. MCCLURE, Lecturer in Managerial Studies
B.B.A. (Mississippi State 1983); M.B.A. (Vanderbilt 1987) [2015]
JANET M. MCDONALD, Adjunct Associate Professor of Managerial
Studies
B.S. (Tennessee 1983); M.B.A. (Belmont 2003) [2006]
PHILIP JAMES MCFARLAND, Associate Professor of German
B.A. (Oberlin 1986); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1998, 2002) [2010]
EBONY O. MCGEE, Assistant Professor of Diversity and STEM Education;
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Health, and Society
B.S. (North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State 1996); M.S. (New
Jersey Institute of Technology 1998); Ph.D. (Illinois, Chicago 2009)
[2012]
THOMAS A. MCGINN, Professor of History; Professor of Law
A.B. (Harvard 1978); M.A. (Cambridge [U.K.] 1980); Ph.D. (Michigan
1986) [1986]
RICHARD MCGREGOR, Associate Professor of Religious Studies
B.A. (Toronto [Canada] 1990); M.A., Ph.D. (McGill [Canada] 1993,
2001) [2003]
HASSANE S. MCHAOURAB, Louise B. McGavock Chair; Professor of
Molecular Physiology and Biophysics; Professor of Chemistry
B.S., M.S. (American University of Beirut [Lebanon] 1987, 1989); Ph.D.
(Medical College of Wisconsin 1993) [2000]
RUSSELL M. MCINTIRE, Senior Lecturer in Philosophy, Emeritus
B.A. (Mississippi 1967); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1971, 1972) [1989]
TATIANA MCINNIS, Lecturer in American Studies
B.A. (Florida International 2012); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2013, 2017)
[2017]
TARA MCKAY, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Health, and Society;
Assistant Professor of Health Policy
B.A. (Occidental 2005); M.A., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 2008,
2013) [2015]
RALPH N. MCKENZIE, Distinguished Professor of Mathematics
B.A., Ph.D. (Colorado 1963, 1966) [1994]
LINDSEY COLMAN MCKERNAN, Assistant Professor of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation; Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences; Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychology
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Tennessee 2006, 2010, 2012) [2014]
JOHN A. MCLEAN, Stevenson Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Michigan 1995); M.Phil., Ph.D. (George Washington 1998, 2001)
[2006]
DOUGLAS G. MCMAHON, Stevenson Chair in Biological Sciences;
Professor of Pharmacology; Chair of the Department of Biological
Sciences
B.A., Ph.D. (Virginia 1980, 1986) [2002]
TIMOTHY P. MCNAMARA, Professor of Psychology
B.G.S. (Kansas 1979); M.S., M.Phil., Ph.D. (Yale 1981, 1982, 1984)
[1983]
ROBERT HAROLD MCRAE, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (King 2007); Ph.D. (Rutgers 2014) [2016]
SAMUEL T. MCSEVENEY, Professor of History, Emeritus
B.A. (CUNY 1951); M.A. (Connecticut 1953); Ph.D. (Iowa State 1965)
[1972]
JON ELLIS MEACHAM, Distinguished Visiting Professor of Political
Science
B.A. (University of the South 1991) [2013]
ELIZABETH MEADOWS, Senior Lecturer in English; Assistant Director of
the Curb Center
B.A. (Columbia 2001); M.A. (City College of New York 2005); M.A.,
Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006, 2010) [2010]

vanderbilt university
JENS MEILER, Professor of Chemistry; Associate Professor of
Pharmacology; Associate Professor of Biomedical Informatics
VorDiplom, Diploma (Leipzig {Germany] 1995, 1998); Ph.D. (Frankfurt
[Germany] 2001) [2005]
GREGORY F. MELCHOR-BARZ, Professor of Musicology
(Ethnomusicology); Professor of Divinity School; Associate Professor of
Anthropology
B.M. (North Carolina School of the Arts 1982); M.A. (Chicago 1992);
Ph.D. (Brown 1997) [1998]
GABRIEL MENDES, Senior Lecturer in Medicine, Health, and Society
B.A. (Hobart and William Smith 1994); M.T.S. (Harvard 1997); Ph.D.
(Brown 2010) [2016]
CLIVE MENTZEL, Senior Lecturer in Political Science; Senior Lecturer in
Medicine, Health, and Society; Director, Office of Active Citizenship and
Service
Magister Artium, Ph.D. ( 1993, 2000) [2012]
CATERINA MESSINA, Lecturer in Italian
B.A. (University of Trento [Italy] 1999) [2008]
JONATHAN M. METZL Frederick B. Rentschler II Professor of Sociology
and Medicine, Health, and Society; Professor of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences; Professor of History; Professor of Health Policy;
Director of the Center for Medicine, Health, and Society
B.A. (Missouri, Kansas City 1991); M.A. (Stanford 1995); M.D. (Missouri,
Kansas City 1997); Ph.D. (Michigan 2001) [2011]
ADAM S. MEYER, Associate Professor of Jewish Studies
B.A. (Kenyon 1983); M.A. (New Mexico 1986); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1991)
[1991]
KRISTIN MICHELITCH, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Emory 2003); Ph.D. (New York 2013) [2013]
DAVID MICHELSON, Assistant Professor of the History of Christianity;
Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (Hillsdale 1998); M.A. (Trinity Divinity 2001); Ph.D. (Princeton 2007)
[2012]
MILAN MIHAL, Professor of Fine Arts, Emeritus
B.S.Ed., M.S.Ed. (Ohio 1952, 1954); Ph.D. (Michigan 1974) [1968]
MICHAEL L. MIHALIK, Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (California State College 1973); M.A., Ph.D. (SUNY, Binghamton
1977, 1979) [1982]
MARZIA MILAZZO, Assistant Professor of English
M.A. (Freiburg [Germany] 2006); Ph.D. (California, Santa Barbara 2013)
[2013]
ADAM JASON MILLER, Lecturer in English; Pre-major Academic Advisor
B.A. (William and Mary 2008); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2010, 2014)
[2014]
CALVIN F. MILLER, William R. Kenan, Jr., Professor of Earth and
Environmental Sciences; Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences
B.A. (Pomona 1969); M.S. (George Washington 1973); Ph.D. (California,
Los Angeles 1977) [1977]
DAVID M. MILLER III, Professor of Cell and Developmental Biology;
Professor of Biological Science
B.S. (Southern Mississippi 1973); Ph.D. (Rice 1981) [1994]
MOLLY FRITZ MILLER, Professor of Earth and Environmental Sciences,
Emerita
B.A. (Wooster 1969); M.S. (George Washington 1971); Ph.D. (California,
Los Angeles 1977) [1977]
PAUL BENJAMIN MILLER, Associate Professor of French
B.A., M.A. (Maryland 1987, 1991); Ph.D. (Emory 1999) [2001]
TRACY G. MILLER, Associate Professor of History of Art; Associate
Professor of Asian Studies
B.A. (Arizona State 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1996, 2000)
[2000]
ANDREA MIRABILE, Associate Professor of Italian; Associate Professor of
Cinema and Media Arts
Ph.D. (North Carolina 2005) [2007]
CECILIA HYUNJUNG MO, Assistant Professor of Political Science;
Assistant Professor of Public Policy and Education
B.A. (Southern California 2002); M.A. (Loyola Marymount 2004); M.P.A.
(Harvard 2006); Ph.D. (Stanford 2012) [2012]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
ROBERT L. MODE, Professor of History of Art, Emeritus
B.A. (Rochester 1962); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan 1964, 1970) [1967]
LETIZIA MODENA, Associate Professor of Italian
Laurea (Bologna [Italy] 1993); M.A. (Virginia 1999); Ph.D. (Johns
Hopkins 2005) [2012]
CATHERINE A. MOLINEUX, Associate Professor of History
B.S., B.A. (Texas 1999, 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 2002,
2005) [2005]
ALEJANDRO MOLNAR, Assistant Professor of Economics
Licenciatura (Buenos Aires [Argentina] 2004); Ph.D. (Stanford 2013)
[2013]
ABELARDO C. MONCAYO, Senior Lecturer for the Center for Medicine,
Health, and Society; Associate Clinical Professor of Health Policy
B.S., M.S. (Ohio 1988, 1993); Ph.D. (Massachusetts, Boston 1998)
[2005]
ALICIA L. MONROE, Mellon Assistant Professor of African American and
Diaspora Studies
B.A. ( 2000); M.A. (Kansas 2003); Ph.D. (Emory 2014) [2015]
ELIZABETH J. MOODEY, Associate Professor of History of Art
B.A. (Tufts 1977); M.A. (Delaware 1987); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1992,
2002) [2006]
MARIE LORENA MOORE, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in English
B.A. (Saint Lawrence 1978); M.F.A. (Cornell 1982) [2013]
ROGER E. MOORE, Associate Dean for Undergraduate Education;
Principal Senior Lecturer in English
B.A. (Samford 1990); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1991, 1995) [1995]
ANDREW MOOREHEAD, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Texas, Austin 2006); Ph.D. (Colorado 2017) [2017]
DANIEL J. MORGAN, Associate Dean of the College of Arts and
Science;Senior Lecturer in Earth and Environmental Sciences
B.A. (Pomona 2002); Ph.D. (University of Washington 2009) [2009]
ANDREA MORO, Associate Professor of Economics
M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1995, 1998) [2008]
DANIEL R. MORRISON, Senior Lecturer in Sociology
B.A., M.A. (Missouri 2002, 2004); M.A. (Virginia 2006); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
2012) [2016]
STEVE MOULDS, Writer-in-Residence in Theatre
B.A. (Vanderbilt 2000); M.F.A. (Texas 2011) [2016]
KEVIN D. MURPHY, Andrew W. Mellon Chair in the Humanities; Professor
of History of Art; Chair of the Department of History of Art
B.A. (Swarthmore 1982); M.A. (Boston University 1985); Ph.D.
(Northwestern 1992) [2013]
MARILYN L. MURPHY, Professor of Art, Emerita
B.F.A. (Oklahoma State 1972); M.F.A. (Oklahoma 1978) [1980]
PATRICK R. MURPHY, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (Maryville 1996); M.A. (Tennessee 1999) [2005]
JOSHUA MURRAY, Assistant Professor of Sociology
A.A. (West Valley 2003); M.S. (Portland State 2007); Ph.D. (Stony Brook
2012) [2012]
NEICA MICHELLE MURRAY, Assistant Professor of Spanish
B.A. (Howard 2002); M.A. (New York 2004); Ph.D. (Stony Brook 2010)
[2010]
COURTNEY MUSE, Senior Lecturer in Medicine, Health, and Society
B.A. (Vanderbilt 2000); M.A. (Georgia State 2004); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
2008) [2008]
HECTOR MYERS, Professor of Medicine, Health, and Society; Professor
of Psychology
B.A. ( 1969); M.A., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1971, 1974) [2013]
KEIKO ROSE NAKAJIMA, Senior Lecturer in Japanese
B.A. (Oregon 1995); M.A., Ph.D. (Mississippi 1998, 2002) [2002]
MARIAN NEAMTU, Professor of Mathematics; Chair of the Department of
Mathematics
M.Sc. (Slovak Technical [Slovakia] 1988); Ph.D. (Technische
Hogeschool Twente [Netherlands] 1991) [1992]
DANA NELSON, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of English;
Professor of American Studies; Professor of Women’s and Gender
Studies; Chair of the Department of English
B.A. (Indiana [Pennsylvania] 1984); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan State 1987,
1989) [2004]

233
KAREN NG, Assistant Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (Toronto [Canada] 2005); M.A. (Essex [U.K.] 2006); Ph.D. (New
School for Social Research 2012) [2014]
CHRISTINE RICHTER-NILSSON, Lecturer in German
M.A. (Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen [Germany] 2000); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2017 [2017]
ROSEVELT L. NOBLE, Senior Lecturer in Sociology
B.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1997, 2003) [2003]
JARED NORDMAN, Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences; Assistant
Professor of Cell and Developmental Biology
B.Sc. (Massachusetts 2002); Ph.D. (Tufts 2008) [2015]
DAVID A. NUNNALLY, Professor of Biology, Emeritus
B.S. (University of the South 1956); Ph.D. (Washington University 1961)
[1960]
IFEOMA NWANKWO, Associate Provost for Strategic Initiatives and
Partnerships; Associate Professor of English; Associate Professor of
Teaching and Learning; Associate Professor of American Studies
B.A. (Rutgers, Camden 1994); Ph.D. (Duke 1999) [2006]
ANTHERE NZABATSINDA, Associate Professor of French
B.A. (Rwanda 1978); M.A., Ph.D. (Montreal [Canada] 1986, 1993)
[1996]
CHARLES ROBERT O’DELL, Distinguished Research Professor of
Astrophysics
B.S.Ed. (Illinois State 1959); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1962) [2000]
VOLKER E. OBERACKER, Professor of Physics, Emeritus
Ph.D. (Johann Wolfgang Goethe [Germany] 1977) [1980]
MOSES E. OCHONU, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of History
B.A. (Bayero [Nigeria] 1997); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan 1999, 2004) [2004]
RICHARD D. ODOM, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Texas 1956, 1960); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1963) [1964]
HYUNSEUNG OH, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. (Seoul National [Korea] 2007); M.A., Ph.D. (Columbia 2010, 2014)
[2014]
BUNMI O. OLATUNJI, Professor of Psychology; Professor of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences
B.S. (Wisconsin, Stevens Point 2000); M.A., Ph.D. (Arkansas 2002,
2006) [2006]
ELENA OLAZAGASTI-SEGOVIA, Principal Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A., M.A. (Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras 1972, 1975); Ph.D. (Puerto Rico,
San Juan 1981) [1984]
EMANUELLE K. F. OLIVEIRA, Associate Professor of Portuguese
B.A. (Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro [Brazil]
1988);B.A. (Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro [Brazil] 1989);
M.A., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1994, 2001) [2002]
KELLY OLIVER, W. Alton Jones Professor of Philosophy; Professor of
Women’s and Gender Studies
B.A. (Gonzaga 1979); M.A., Ph.D. (Northwestern 1980, 1987) [2004]
ALEXANDER Y. OLSHANSKIY, Centennial Professor of Mathematics
B.S., Ph.D., D.Sc. (Moscow State [Russia] 1968, 1971, 1979) [1999]
BRUCE I. OPPENHEIMER, Professor of Political Science; Professor of
Public Policy and Education
A.B. (Tufts 1967); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1968, 1973) [1993]
STEPHEN ORNES, Senior Lecturer in Physics
B.S. (Southern Methodist 1996); M.S. (Missouri 2003); M.S.
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2006) [2012]
BRIDGET E. ORR, Associate Professor of English
B.A. (Victoria University of Wellington [New Zealand] 1979); Ph.D.
(Cornell 1995) [2002]
AMARILIS ORTIZ, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A., M.A. (SUNY, Binghamton 1990, 1992); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2004)
[2007]
DENIS OSIN, Professor of Mathematics
M.S., B.S., Ph.D. (Moscow State [Russia] 1996, 1996, 2000) [2008]
JESSICA LEIGH OSTER, Assistant Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences
B.A. (Oberlin 2003); Ph.D. (California, Davis 2010) [2012]
LUCIUS TURNER OUTLAW, JR., Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (Fisk 1967); Ph.D. (Boston College 1972) [2000]

A&S

234
TERRY L. PAGE, Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus; Research
Professor of Biological Sciences
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Texas 1970, 1971, 1974) [1980]
CAROLINA PALACIOS, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A. (Las Americas [Mexico] 1998); Ph.D. (Tennessee 2006) [2006]
THOMAS J. PALMERI, Professor of Psychology
B.S. (Carnegie Mellon 1987); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1995) [1995]
SOKRATES T. PANTELIDES, University Distinguished Professor of Physics
and Engineering;William A. and Nancy F. McMinn Professor of Physics;
Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S. (Northern Illinois 1969); M.S., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1970,
1973) [1994]
SOHEE PARK, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Psychology;
Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (Cambridge [U.K.] 1982); M.A. (Columbia 1985); Ph.D. (Harvard
1991) [2000]
MAULIK R. PATEL, Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences; Assistant
Professor of Cell and Developmental Biology
B.A. (Grinnell 2001); Ph.D. (Stanford 2009) [2015]
DANIEL M. PATTE, Professor of Religious Studies, Emeritus; Professor of
New Testament and Early Christianity, Emeritus
B.A. (Grenoble [France] 1958);B.D. (Université Montpellier I [France]
1960); Th.M. (Geneva [Switzerland] 1964); Th.D. (Chicago Theological
Seminary 1971) [1971]
EVELYN PATTERSON, Associate Professor of Sociology
B.A. (Rice 2002); M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 2004, 2007) [2010]
TIFFANY RUBY PATTERSON, Associate Professor of African American
and Diaspora Studies; Associate Professor of History
B.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1970); M.A. (Southern Illinois 1974); Ph.D.
(Minnesota 1995) [2007]
JAMES A. PATTON, Professor of Physics; Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences
B.S. (Western Kentucky 1966); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1972) [1973]
JAMES G. PATTON, Stevenson Professor of Biological Sciences; Professor
of Cell and Developmental Biology; Professor of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences
B.S. (University of St. Thomas [Minnesota] 1980); Ph.D. (Mayo Medical
1988) [1993]
VESNA PAVLOVIC, Associate Professor of Art
B.F.A. (Belgrade [Serbia] 2002); M.F.A. (Columbia 2007) [2009]
EFREN PEREZ, Associate Professor of Political Science
B.A. (San Diego 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Duke 2006, 2008) [2008]
JESSE PETERSON, Associate Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Westmont 2001); Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 2006) [2008]
REBECCA A. PETERSON, Lecturer in Education; Lecturer in French
B.A. (Taylor 1996); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2002) [2002]
TODD E. PETERSON, Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Associate Professor of Physics; Faculty Director of the Office
of Honor Scholarships
B.A. (Gustavus Adolphus 1991);B.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1993); M.S., Ph.D.
(Indiana, Bloomington 1994, 2000) [2003]
ELYSE PETIT, Senior Lecturer in French
M.A. (Louisiana 2010); M.A., Ph.D. (Arizona 2013, 2017) [2017]
JULEIGH PETTY, Senior Lecturer in Medicine, Health, and Society;
Assistant Director of Medicine, Health, and Society
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1995); Ph.D. (Northwestern 2008) [2008]
HELMUT F. PFANNER, Professor of German, Emeritus
M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 1961, 1965) [1990]
F. CARTER PHILIPS, Professor of Classics, Emeritus
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1965); A.M., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1966, 1969) [1969]
SHAWN T. PHILLIPS, Principal Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.S. (Union [Tennessee] 1988); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1992, 1994)
[1993]
CHARLOTTE PIERCE-BAKER, Professor of Women’s and Gender Studies
and English, Emerita
B.A. (Howard 1965); M.A. (Ohio State 1966); Ph.D. (Temple 1985)
[2006]
PAMELA K. PIGG, Senior Lecturer in Mathematics
B.S. (Belmont 1974); M.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1995) [1996]

vanderbilt university
MARIA PAZ PINTANE, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
Licenciado (Santiago de Compostela [Spain] 1993); M.A. (Rhode Island
1995); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2004) [2010]
RICHARD N. PITT, JR., Associate Professor of Sociology; Associate
Professor of Ethics and Society; Associate Professor of American
Studies
B.S., M.Ed. (Pennsylvania State 1991, 1994); M.A., Ph.D. (Arizona
1999, 2003) [2003]
Lars Plate, Assistant Professor of Chemistry and Biological Sciences
B.S. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2007); Ph.D. (California,
Berkeley 2013) [2017]
JOHN F. PLUMMER III, Professor of English, Emeritus
B.A. (Northern Illinois 1966); M.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1968); Ph.D.
(Washington University 1971) [1971]
MICHAEL D. PLUMMER, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.A. (Wabash 1959); M.S., Ph.D. (Michigan 1961, 1966) [1970]
PRASAD LEELA POLAVARAPU, Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Andhra [India] 1970); M.S. (Birla Institute of Technology and
Science [India] 1972); Ph.D. (Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
1977) [1980]
MATTIAS POLBORN, Professor of Economics; Professor of Political
Science
B.A., Ph.D. (Munich [Germany] 1995, 1998) [2016]
SEAN M. POLYN, Associate Professor of Psychology; Assistant Professor
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (Virginia 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2003, 2005) [2009]
LJUBICA D. POPOVICH, Professor of Art History, Emerita
Diploma (Belgrade [Serbia] 1955); Ph.D. (Bryn Mawr 1963) [1966]
MELISSA R. PORTER, Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences; Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychology
B.S. (Illinois State 1999); M.A., Psy.D. (Roosevelt 2003, 2006) [2016]
NED A. PORTER, Centennial Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus
B.S.Ch.E. (Princeton 1965); Ph.D. (Harvard 1970) [1998]
RICHARD N. PORTER, Professor of Slavic Languages and Literatures,
Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Vanderbilt 1954, 1958); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1968)
[1959]
JOHN FREDERIC POST, Professor of Philosophy, Emeritus
A.B. (Harvard 1958); M.A. (Wisconsin 1959); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley
1968) [1965]
ALEXANDER M. POWELL, Associate Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Rutgers, Camden 1997); M.A., Ph.D. (Maryland 1999, 2003)
[2005]
DAVID H. PRICE, Professor of Religious Studies
B.A., M.A. (Cincinnati 1979, 1981); Ph.D. (Yale 1985) [2016]
RICHARD A. PRIDE, Professor of Political Science, Emeritus
B.A. (Stanford 1964); M.A. (California, Santa Barbara 1965); Ph.D.
(Minnesota 1970) [1968]
C. ENRIQUE PUPO-WALKER, Centennial Professor of Spanish, Emeritus
B.C.L. (Habana [Cuba] 1954); M.A. (Peabody 1962); Ph.D. (North
Carolina 1966) [1969]
NA QIN, Lecturer in Chemistry
B.A., B.S. (Dalian University of Technology [China] 2007, 2007); M.S.
(Miami [Ohio] 2010); M.S.L.S. (Indiana, Bloomington 2013) [2017]
JUSTIN QUARRY, Senior Lecturer in English
B.A. (Vanderbilt 2003); M.F.A. (Virginia 2006) [2010]
JOHN A. RAFTER, JR., Senior Lecturer in Mathematics
B.S. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1989); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
1991, 1994) [1995]
LORI HENSLEE RAFTER, Senior Lecturer in Mathematics
B.S. (Tennessee 1983); M.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1990); M.S.,
Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1993, 1996) [2001]
RAMNARAYAN RAMACHANDRAN, Assistant Professor of Hearing and
Speech Sciences; Assistant Professor of Psychology
M.Sc. (Birla Institute of Technology [India] 1991); M.S. (Virginia
Commonwealth 1993); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 2000) [2012]
AKUNURI V. RAMAYYA, Professor of Physics
B.S., M.S. (Andhra [India] 1957, 1958); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington
1964); D.Sc. (hon., Eastern Kentucky 2009); D.Sc. (hon., Guru
Ghasidas Central University 2010) [1964]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
LYNN TARTE RAMEY, Professor of French
B.A.S., B.A. (Pennsylvania 1986, 1986); M.A. (Indiana, Bloomington
1991); Ph.D. (Harvard 1997) [1998]
MATTHEW RAMSEY, Professor of History and Medicine, Health, and
Society, Emeritus
A.B., A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard 1969, 1971, 1978) [1984]
ALICE RANDALL, Writer in Residence in African American and Diaspora
Studies
A.B. (Harvard 1981) [2003]
JOSEPH J. RANDO, JR., Associate Professor of the Practice of
Managerial Studies
B.S. (Tufts 1988); M.B.A. (Babson 1996) [2009]
RARES RASDEACONU, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Bucharest [Romania] 1997); Ph.D. (Stony Brook 2005) [2010]
PHILIP D. RASICO, Professor of Spanish and Portuguese
A.B. (Xavier [Ohio] 1974); M.A., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1975,
1981) [1984]
JOHN G. RATCLIFFE, Professor of Mathematics; Vice Chair of the
Department of Mathematics
B.S., A.M., Ph.D. (Michigan 1970, 1973, 1977) [1985]
JONATHAN RATTNER, Assistant Professor of Cinema and Media Arts
B.F.A. (New York 2000); M.F.A., M.F.A. (Iowa 2008, 2009) [2009]
JAMES LEE RAY, Professor of Political Science, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Ohio State 1966, 1968); Ph.D. (Michigan 1974) [1997]
SUZANNE M. REED, Lecturer in Managerial Studies
M.B.A. (Mississippi State );B.A. (Western Kentucky ) [2017]
ARTHUR L. REESMAN, Professor of Geology, Emeritus
B.S. (Eureka 1955); M.A., Ph.D. (Missouri 1961, 1966) [1968]
JENNIFER F. REINGANUM, E. Bronson Ingram Professor of Economics;
Professor of Law
B.A. (Oberlin 1976); M.S., Ph.D. (Northwestern 1978, 1979) [1995]
NANCY B. REISMAN, Associate Professor of English
B.A. (Tufts 1984); M.F.A. (Massachusetts 1991) [2005]
CHRISTINA HUBBARD RENNHOFF, Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.A. (Barnard 1996); M.A., Ph.D. (Virginia 2002, 2005) [2007]
ERIN C. RERICHA, Assistant Professor of Physics
B.S. (Texas A&M 1997); Ph.D. (Texas 2004) [2011]
Raisa Rexer, Assistant Professor of French
B.A., Ph.D. (2004, 2014); Mst. (Oxford 2005); M.A. (Pennsylvania 2007)
[2017]
JOSEPH L. RIFE, Associate Professor of Classical and Mediterranean
Studies; Associate Professor of Anthropology; Director, Classical and
Mediterranean Studies Program
A.B. (Kenyon 1992); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan 1995, 1999) [2008]
Tasha Rijke-Epstein, Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (Loyola 1997); M.Phil. (Cape Town [South Africa] 2006); Ph.D.
(Michigan 2017) [2017]
CARMELO J. RIZZO, Professor of Chemistry; Professor of Biochemistry;
Vice Chair of Chemistry
B.S. (Temple 1984); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1990) [1992]
JAKAYLA RENEE ROBBINS, Senior Lecturer in Mathematics
B.S. (Olivet Nazarene 1997); M.A., Ph.D. (Kentucky, Lexington 1999,
2003) [2011]
BETSEY ANN ROBINSON, Associate Professor of History of Art;
Associate Professor of Anthropology
A.B. (Radcliffe 1990); A.M. (Harvard 1995); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 2001)
[2008]
Renã A. S. Robinson, Associate Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Louisville 2000); Ph.D. (Indiana 2007) [2017]
WILLIAM FRANCIS ROBINSON, Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1984); M.A. (Florida 1988); Ph.D. (Auburn 1999)
[2002]
NANCY ROCHE, Lecturer in English
B.S.N. (Vanderbilt 1980); M.F.A. (Brown 1991); Ph.D. (Middle
Tennessee State 2011) [2012]
JOEL RODRIGUE, Associate Professor of Economics; Vice Chair of the
Department of Economics
B.A. (Manitoba [Canada] 2001); M.A., Ph.D. (Queen’s [Canada] 2002,
2008) [2008]

235
RUDY RODSPHON, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
Master (Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon 2011); Ph.D. (Université
Claude Bernard Lyon 1 [France] 2014) [2015]
RUTH ROGASKI, Associate Professor of History; Acting Director of the
Asian Studies Program
B.A. (Pennsylvania 1984); M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1990, 1996) [2003]
ANTONIS ROKAS, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Biological Sciences;
Associate Professor of Biomedical Informatics
B.Sc. (Crete [Greece] 1998); Ph.D. (Edinburgh [U.K.] 2001) [2007]
AURORA B. ROMERO, Lecturer in German; Pre-major Academic Advisor
A.A. (Fullerton 2006); B.A., B.A. (California, Irvine 2009, 2009); M.A.,
Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2011, 2016) [2016]
CHARLES E. ROOS, Professor of Physics, Emeritus
B.A. (Texas 1948); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1953) [1959]
SANDRA J. ROSENTHAL, Jack and Pamela Egan Professor of Chemistry;
Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; Professor of
Materials Science and Engineering; Professor of Pharmacology
B.S. (Valparaiso 1987); Ph.D. (Chicago 1993) [1996]
NORBERT ROSS, Associate Professor of Anthropology
M.A., Ph.D., Habilitation (Freiburg [Germany] 1995, 1998, 2002) [2003]
PETER L. ROUSSEAU, Professor of Economics; Professor of History;
Chair of the Department of Economics
B.A., M.S. (Iona 1983, 1986); Ph.D. (New York 1995) [1995]
EDWARD L. RUBIN, University Professor of Law and Political Science;
Professor of Political Science
A.B. (Princeton 1969);J.D. (Yale 1979) [2005]
CARRIE RUSSELL, Senior Lecturer in Political Science
B.A. (Rhodes College 1997); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2010) [2010]
CLIFFORD S. RUSSELL, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
A.B. (Dartmouth 1960); Ph.D. (Harvard 1968) [1985]
EDWARD B. SAFF, Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1964); Ph.D. (Maryland 1968)
[2001]
KAMAL SAGGI, Dean of Social Sciences; Frances and John Downing
Family Chair; Professor of Economics
B.A. (Ohio Wesleyan 1990); M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1992, 1995)
[2010]
RUPINDER SAGGI, Principal Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.A. (Ohio Wesleyan 1992); Ph.D. (North Carolina 2000) [2010]
ZARUHI M. SAHAKYAN, Lecturer in Economics
B.A. (Yerevan State [Armenia] 1999); M.A. (Yale 2001); M.S., Ph.D.
(Illinois, Champaign 2005, 2008) [2016]
MARIANO SANA, Associate Professor of Sociology
M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1998, 2003) [2009]
ELISABETH HOLLISTER SANDBERG, Senior Lecturer in Psychology
M.A., B.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1990, 1990, 1995) [2010]
MARY LYNN SANDOZ, Senior Lecturer in Communication Studies
B.A., M.S. (Mississippi State 1983, 1985) [1991]
PEDRO H. SANT’ ANNA, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A. ( 2009); M.A., Ph.D. (Juan March Institute 2011, 2015) [2015]
MARK SAPIR, Centennial Professor of Mathematics
Diploma (Ural State [Russia] 1978); Ph.D. (Moscow Pedagogical
[Russia] 1983) [1997]
ALEXANDRA A. SARGENT, Senior Lecturer in Theatre
B.A. (Middlebury 1989); M.F.A. (Northwestern 1995) [2001]
Yuya Sasaki, Associate Professor of Economics
B.S., M.S. (Utah State 2002, 2007); M.A., Ph.D. (Brown 2008, 2012)
[2017]
MAREIKE SATTLER, Senior Lecturer in Anthropology
Magister (Hamburg [Germany] 1993) [2003]
JACOB JAMES SAUER, Lecturer in Anthropology
B.A. (Brigham Young 2003); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2012) [2012]
AKSHYA SAXENA, Assistant Professor of English
B.A. (Delhi [India] 2006); M.A. (Jawaharlal Nehru [India] 2008); Ph.D.
(Minnesota 2016) [2016]
ALLISON SCHACHTER, Associate Professor of Jewish Studies; Director of
Jewish Studies
B.A. (Stanford 1996); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2006) [2006]
SILKE SCHADE, Senior Lecturer in German
B.A. (Smith 1997); M.A., Ph.D. (Cincinnati 2000, 2007) [2016]

A&S

236
JEFFREY D. SCHALL, E. Bronson Ingram Professor of Neuroscience;
Professor of Psychology; Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual
Sciences
B.S. (Denver 1982); Ph.D. (Utah 1986) [1989]
ERIC SCHECHTER, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.S. (Maryland 1973); M.S., Ph.D. (Chicago 1975, 1978) [1980]
ROBERT J. SCHERRER, Professor of Physics
A.B. (Princeton 1981); M.A. (Cambridge [U.K.] 1983); Ph.D. (Chicago
1986) [2003]
NATHAN D. SCHLEY, Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (California, Davis 2007); M.S., Ph.D. (Yale 2009, 2012) [2015]
DAVID G. SCHLUNDT, Associate Professor of Psychology
A.B. (Indiana, Bloomington 1976); M.S. (Wisconsin 1979); Ph.D.
(Indiana, Bloomington 1982) [1985]
LAUREL SCHNEIDER, Professor of Religious Studies; Interim Chair of the
Department of French and Italian
A.B. (Dartmouth 1984); M.Div. (Harvard 1990); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1997)
[2013]
MARK L. SCHOENFIELD, Professor of English
B.A. (Yale 1981); M.P.W., A.M., Ph.D. (Southern California 1986, 1986,
1989) [1990]
Peter Schram, Assistant Professor of Political Science
A.B. (Princeton 2009); Ph.D. (Stanford 2017) [2017]
LARRY L. SCHUMAKER, Stevenson Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (South Dakota School of Mines and Technology 1961); M.S., Ph.D.
(Stanford 1962, 1966) [1988]
THOMAS ALAN SCHWARTZ, Professor of History
A.B. (Columbia 1976); M.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1978); A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard
1979, 1985) [1990]
KATHRYN SCHWARZ, Professor of English
A.B., M.A., Ph.D. (Harvard 1988, 1990, 1994) [1996]
CHARLES EDWARD SCOTT, Distinguished Professor of Philosophy,
Emeritus; Adjunct Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (Southern Methodist 1957);B.D., M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1961, 1962,
1965) [1966]
VIRGINIA M. SCOTT, Professor of French; Professor of Teaching and
Learning
B.A. (Eckerd 1973); M.A. (Florida State 1975); Ph.D. (Emory 1987)
[1988]
ADRIANE E. SEIFFERT, Senior Lecturer in Psychology; Research Assistant
Professor of Psychology
M.A. (Harvard 1988);B.S. (Waterloo [U.K.] 1995); Ph.D. (Harvard 2000)
[2004]
MITCHELL A. SELIGSON, Centennial Professor of Political Science
B.A. (CUNY, Brooklyn College 1967); M.A. (Florida 1968); Ph.D.
(Pittsburgh 1974) [2004]
LUKE SEMRAU, Lecturer in Philosophy
B.A. (Whitman 2003); M.S. (Saint Joseph’s, Philadephia 2007); M.A.
(Tufts 2011); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2016) [2016]
CHOON-LEONG SEOW, Distinguished Professor of Hebrew Bible;
Vanderbilt, Buffington, Cupples Professor of Divinity; Professor of
Jewish Studies
B.A. (Pepperdine 1977); M.Div. (Princeton Theological Seminary 1980);
Ph.D. (Harvard 1984) [2015]
SEAN B. SEYMORE, Professor of Law; Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Tennessee 1993); M.S. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1996);
Ph.D., J.D. (Notre Dame 2001, 2006) [2010]
SONGLING SHAN, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. ( 2008); M.S. (East China Normal 2011); M.S., Ph.D. (Georgia
State 2014, 2015) [2015]
SHERI F. SHANEYFELT, Principal Senior Lecturer in History of Art
B.S. (Centre 1990); M.A. (Vanderbilt 1995); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington
2001) [2002]
DANIEL J. SHARFSTEIN, Tarkington Chair in Teaching Excellence;
Professor of Law; Professor of History; Co-Director, Social Justice
Program
A.B. (Harvard 1994);J.D. (Yale 2000) [2007]

vanderbilt university
TRACY D. SHARPLEY-WHITING, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor
of African American Studies and French
B.S. (Rochester 1989); M.A. (Miami [Ohio] 1990); Ph.D. (Brown 1994)
[2004]
SAMIRA SHEIKH, Associate Professor of History; Associate Professor of
Asian Studies
B.A. (Maharaja Sayajirao [India] 1992); M.A., M.Phil. (Jawaharlal Nehru
[India] 1994, 1996); D.Phil. (Wolfson College, Oxford [U.K.] 2003) [2009]
PAUL D. SHELDON, Professor of Physics
A.B., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1980, 1986) [1991]
JEFFREY T. SHENTON, Senior Lecturer in Anthropology and Writing;
Assistant Director of the Writing Studio
B.A. (Pennsylvania 2002); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2009, 2014) [2014]
DONALD W. SHERBURNE, Professor of Philosophy, Emeritus
B.A. (Middlebury 1951); B.A. (Oxford 1953); M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1958,
1960) [1960]
HAERIN SHIN, Assistant Professor of English
B.A. (Seoul National [Korea] 2001); Ph.D. (Stanford 2013) [2013]
HEERYOON SHIN, Mellon Assistant Professor of History of Art
B.A., M.A. (Seoul National [Korea] 2004, 2007); M.A., M.Phil., Ph.D.
(Yale 2011, 2012, 2015) [2017]
JOHN J. SIEGFRIED, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.S. (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 1967); M.A. (Pennsylvania State
1968); M.S., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1971, 1972) [1972]
WILLIAM G. SIESSER, Professor of Geology, Emeritus
B.S. (Kansas 1962); M.S. (Louisiana State 1967); Ph.D. (Cape Town
[South Africa] 1971) [1979]
GIERI SIMONETT, Professor of Mathematics
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Zurich [Switzerland] 1984, 1988, 1992) [1995]
STACY CLIFFORD SIMPLICAN, Senior Lecturer in Women’s and Gender
Studies
B.S., M.A. (Ohio 2004, 2006); Certificate, Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2011, 2011)
[2012]
CHARLES K. SINGLETON, Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus
B.S. (Georgia 1976); Ph.D. (Purdue 1980) [1984]
SANDY D. SKENE, Lecturer in Philosophy
B.A. (Colorado, Denver 2009); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2016) [2016]
GARNETT HOUSTON SLATTON, JR., Associate Professor of Managerial
Studies
B.A. (Duke 1977); M.B.A. (Harvard 1981); M.Div. (Reformed Theological
Seminary, Charlotte 1999) [2008]
JOHN M. SLOOP, Associate Provost for Digital Learning; Professor of
Communication Studies
B.S. (Appalachian State 1985); M.A. (Georgia 1988); Ph.D. (Iowa 1992)
[1995]
Bradley C. Smith, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (North Carolina, Chapel Hill 2012); Ph.D. (Rochester 2017) [2017]
HELMUT W. SMITH, Martha Rivers Ingram Professor of History; Director of
the Digital Humanities Center
A.B. (Cornell 1984); M.Phil., Ph.D. (Yale 1988, 1992) [1991]
LESLIE M. SMITH, Senior Lecturer in Psychology
A.B., Ph.D. (Brown 1976, 1980) [1991]
WILLIAM PAUL SMITH, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A. (Duke 1958); M.A., Ph.D. (North Carolina 1962, 1963) [1965]
STEPHANIE A. SO, Senior Lecturer in Economics
A.B. (Princeton 1986); M.S., Ph.D. (Rochester 1996, 1996) [2002]
DANIEL PETER SOLOMON, Principal Senior Lecturer in Classical and
Mediterranean Studies
B.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1991); Ph.D. (Yale 1998) [1998]
SANDY SOLOMON, Associate Director of Creative Writing; Writer in
Residence in English
B.A., M.A. (Chicago 1970, 1971); M.A. (Johns Hopkins 1984); M.F.A.
(Warren Wilson 1987) [2008]
LIJUN SONG, Associate Professor of Sociology; Associate Professor of
Asian Studies
B.A., M.A. (Shandong [China] 2000, 2003); Ph.D. (Duke 2009) [2009]
TERRIE LEE SPETALNICK, Lecturer in Sociology
B.C.E. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1981); M.B.A. (Georgia State
1985); M.A. (Alabama, Birmingham 1991); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2005)
[2005]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
HORTENSE SPILLERS, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of English
B.A., M.A. (Memphis 1964, 1966); Ph.D. (Brandeis 1974) [2006]
ALISTAIR SPONSEL, Assistant Professor of History
B.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 2000); M.Sc. (Imperial College of Science
and Technology [U.K.] 2001); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2004, 2009)
[2012]
RONALD SPORES, Professor of Anthropology, Emeritus
B.S. (Oregon 1953); M.A. (University of the Americas 1960); M.A., Ph.D.
(Harvard 1963, 1964) [1965]
MICHAEL G. STABIN, Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Associate Professor of Physics; Associate Professor of Civil
and Environmental Engineering
B.S., M.E. (Florida 1981, 1983); Ph.D. (Tennessee 1996) [1998]
DAVID HUGH STACEY III, Adjunct Professor of Managerial Studies
B.S. (Tennessee 1990); M.B.A. (Middle Tennessee State 1994) [2010]
JO ANN W. STAPLES, Senior Lecturer in Mathematics, Emerita
A.B. (Western Kentucky 1969); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1973, 1975)
[1976]
LAURA STARK, Associate Professor of Medicine, Health, and Society;
Associate Professor of History; Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.S. (Cornell 1998); Ph.D. (Princeton 2006) [2012]
KEIVAN G. STASSUN, Senior Associate Dean for Graduate Education and
Research; Stevenson Chair in Physics; Professor of Astronomy
A.B. (California, Berkeley 1994); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2000) [2003]
RICHARD G. STEARNS, Professor of Geology, Emeritus
B.A., M.S. (Vanderbilt 1948, 1949); Ph.D. (Northwestern 1953) [1961]
RONNIE J. STEINBERG, Professor of Sociology, Emerita
B.A. (Bennington 1969); M.A., Ph.D. (New York 1973, 1977) [1997]
TONY K. STEWART, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in Humanities;
Professor of Religious Studies; Professor of Asian Studies; Chair of the
Department of Religious Studies
B.A. (Western Kentucky 1976); A.M., Ph.D. (Chicago 1981, 1985)
[2011]
PAUL HENRY STOB, Associate Professor of Communication Studies;
Associate Professor of American Studies
B.A. (Calvin 2002); M.A. (Texas A&M 2004); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2009)
[2009]
MICHAEL P. STONE, Professor of Chemistry; Professor of Biochemistry
B.S. (California, Davis 1977); Ph.D. (California, Irvine 1981) [1984]
MATTHEW STRATTON, Senior Lecturer in Theatre
B.A. (Southern Illinois 2006); M.F.A. (Illinois, Champaign 2009) [2009]
JASON STRUDLER, Mellon Assistant Professor of Russian
B.A. (Rochester 2006); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2010, 2014) [2013]
GERALD J. STUBBS, Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus;
Research Professor of Biological Sciences
B.S. (Australian National 1968); Ph.D. (Oxford [U.K.] 1972) [1983]
GARY ALLEN SULIKOWSKI, Stevenson Chair in Chemistry; Professor of
Pharmacology
B.S. (Wayne State 1983); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1989) [2004]
MICHELE MILLER SULIKOWSKI, Principal Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.A. (Rosemont 1986); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1991) [2004]
CHIARA SULPRIZIO, Senior Lecturer in Classical and Mediterranean
Studies
B.A. (University of Washington 1999); Ph.D. (Southern California 2007)
[2016]
IOANA SUVAINA, Associate Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Bucharest [Romania] 1999); Ph.D. (Stony Brook 2006) [2009]
GEORGE H. SWEENEY, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.S. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1972); M.A., Ph.D.
(Northwestern 1973, 1977) [1976]
CLAUDINE TAAFFE, Senior Lecturer in African American and Diaspora
Studies
B.A. (Rochester 1991); Ed.M., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 2006, 2016)
[2016]
CRAIG J. TAINTER, Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.S. (Wisconsin, La Crosse 2007); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2012) [2016]

237
ROBERT BASIL TALISSE, W. Alton Jones Chair in Philosophy; Chair of the
Department of Philosophy
B.A. (William Paterson 1993); M.A. (New York 1995); M.Phil., Ph.D.
(CUNY 1998, 2000) [2001]
AMY GANT TAN, Research Assistant Professor of History
B.A., M.A. (Nebraska 2004, 2007); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2011, 2015)
[2015]
ANAND VIVEK TANEJA, Assistant Professor of Religious Studies
B.A. (Delhi [India] 2001); M.A. (Jamia Millia [India] 2004); Ph.D.
(Columbia 2013) [2013]
ANTHONY M. TANG, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.B.A. (Loyola, New Orleans 1949); Ph.D. (Uniformed Services 1995)
[1955]
LYDIA TANG, Assistant Professor of German
M.A. (Georg-August-Universität Göttingen [Germany] 2006); Ph.D.
(New York 2013) [2016]
ANN THOMAS TATE, Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences
B.S. (Rice 2009); Ph.D. (Princeton 2014) [2017]
GARRETT W. TATE, Senior Lecturer in Earth and Environmental Sciences
B.A., B.S. (Rice 2009, 2009); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2011, 2014)
[2017]
JOEL TELLINGHUISEN, Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus
A.B. (Cornell 1965); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1969) [1975]
HENRY A. TELOH, Professor of Philosophy, Emeritus
B.A. (Illinois, Champaign 1967); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1971, 1972)
[1972]
RACHEL TEUKOLSKY, Associate Professor of English
B.A. (Harvard 1996); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2004) [2008]
TARIQ THACHIL, Associate Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Stanford 2003); M.A., Ph.D. (Cornell 2007, 2009) [2016]
SHARECE D. THROWER, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Ohio State 2008); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2011, 2013) [2016]
CECELIA TICHI, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Chair in English; Professor
of American Studies
B.A. (Pennsylvania State 1964); M.A. (Johns Hopkins 1965); Ph.D.
(California, Davis 1968) [1987]
JEFFREY S. TLUMAK, Associate Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (CUNY, Brooklyn College 1969); M.A., Ph.D. (Massachusetts 1972,
1975) [1973]
TARA DECUIR TODD, Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.S., Ph.D. (Texas A&M 1992, 1997) [2004]
NORMAN H. TOLK, Professor of Physics; Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences
A.B. (Harvard 1960); Ph.D. (Columbia 1966) [1984]
ANDREW J. TOMARKEN, Associate Professor of Psychology; Associate
Professor of Biostatistics
A.B. (Harvard 1977); M.S., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1982, 1988) [1989]
FRANK TONG, Professor of Psychology; Professor of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences
B.S. (Queen’s [Canada] 1995); M.A., Ph.D. (Harvard 1998, 1999) [2004]
GABRIEL ALEJANDRO TORRES COLON, Senior Lecturer in American
Studies; Assistant Director of American Studies
B.A. (Maryland 2000); M.A., Ph.D. (New Mexico 2008, 2008) [2016]
STEVEN D. TOWNSEND, Assistant Professor of Chemistry
B.S. (Oakland 2005); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2010) [2014]
BEN TRAN, Assistant Professor of Asian Studies
B.A. (Emory 1998); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2008) [2008]
COURTNEY CAUDLE TRAVERS, Senior Lecturer in Communication
Studies
B.A. (Florida 2007); M.A. (Georgia 2009); Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign
2015) [2015]
BRENT TRENTHAM, Associate Professor of the Practice of Managerial
Studies
B.S., M.Acct. (Tennessee 1988, 1989) [2010]
BENIGNO TRIGO, Professor of Spanish; Chair of the Department of
Spanish and Portuguese
B.A. (Amherst 1984); Ph.D. (Yale 1992) [2004]

A&S

238
LATONYA TROTTER, Assistant Professor of Sociology
B.A. (Williams 1998); M.P.H. (University of Washington 2006); M.A.,
Ph.D. (Princeton 2009, 2013) [2013]
JENNIFER TRUEBLOOD, Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.S., M.A., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 2007, 2009, 2012) [2015]
BARBARA TSAKIRGIS, Professor of Classical and Mediterranean Studies,
Emerita; Professor of History of Art, Emerita
B.A. (Yale 1976); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1979, 1984) [1984]
STEVEN T. TSCHANTZ, Associate Professor of Mathematics
A.B., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1979, 1983) [1984]
CONSTANTINE TSINAKIS, Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Aristotelion [Greece] 1970); M.S. (Houston 1975); Ph.D. (California,
Berkeley 1979) [1980]
ARLEEN M. TUCHMAN, Professor of History
B.S. (Marlboro 1977); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1980, 1984) [1986]
HOLLY A. TUCKER, Professor of French
B.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1989); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1991, 1995)
[1995]
DAVID L. TULEEN, Professor of Chemistry, Emeritus
B.S. (Wittenberg 1958); Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1962) [1963]
TIFFINY A. TUNG, Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (California, Santa Barbara 1995); M.A., Ph.D. (North Carolina 1998,
2004) [2004]
R. JAY TURNER, Harvie Branscomb Distinguished Chair in Sociology,
Emeritus; Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (California State 1957); Ph.D. (Syracuse 1964) [2010]
ZDRAVKA TZANKOVA, Associate Professor of Sociology
B.A. (Mount Holyoke 1998); M.A. (Brown 2000); Ph.D. (California,
Berkeley 2007) [2015]
SAIT A. UMAR, Professor of Physics
B.S. (Bogaziçi [Turkey] 1979); M.Phil., M.S., Ph.D. (Yale 1985, 1985,
1985) [1986]
DANIEL H. USNER, JR., Holland M. McTyeire Professor of History
B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1975); M.A., Ph.D. (Duke 1976, 1981) [2002]
CAGLAR UYANIK, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S., M.S. (Middle East Technical [Turkey] 2008, 2010), Ph.D., (Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign 2017) [2017]
JASON G. VALENTINE, Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Assistant Professor of Physics; Assistant Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.S. (Purdue 2005); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2010) [2010]
REBECCA KEEGAN VANDIVER, Assistant Professor of History of Art
A.B. (Harvard 2004); M.A., Ph.D. (Duke 2009, 2013) [2013]
KALMAN VARGA, Professor of Physics
Diploma, Ph.D. (Debrecen [Hungary] 1989, 1996) [2005]
JULIA A. VELKOVSKA, Professor of Physics
M.S. (St. Clement of Ohrid University of Sofia [Bulgaria] 1988); Ph.D.
(Stony Brook 1997) [2003]
MOMCHIL VELKOVSKY, Senior Lecturer in Physics
M.S. (St. Clement of Ohrid University of Sofia [Bulgaria] 1987); Ph.D.
(Stony Brook 1997) [2003]
SUSAN DENISE VERBERNE-SUTTON, Senior Lecturer in Chemistry
B.S. (Southeastern Louisiana 2000); M.S. (California, Davis 2004); Ph.D.
(Louisiana State 2014) [2014]
Marta Verweij, Assistant Professor of Physics
B.Sc., M.Sc., Ph.D. (Utrecht [Netherlands] 2005, 2008, 2013) [2017]
W. KIP VISCUSI, University Distinguished Professor of Law, Economics,
and Management; Professor of Economics; Professor of Management;
Co-Director, Ph.D. Program in Law and Economics
A.B., M.P.P., A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard 1971, 1973, 1974, 1976) [2006]
V. JACQUE VOEGELI III, Dean of the College of Arts and Science,
Emeritus; Professor of History, Emeritus
B.S. (Murray State College 1956); M.A., Ph.D. (Tulane 1961, 1965)
[1967]
MARKUS VOEHLER, Research Associate Professor of Chemistry
M.S. (Zürcher Hochschule für Angewandte Wissenschaften
[Switzerland] 1985); M.S. (Interstaatliche Hochschule für Technik
[Switzerland] 1986); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007) [2008]
JOHN VROOMAN, Principal Senior Lecturer in Economics
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Texas 1969, 1972, 1976) [1999]

vanderbilt university
MARK T. WALLACE, Dean of the Graduate School; Louise B. McGavock
Chair; Professor of Hearing and Speech Sciences; Professor of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; Professor of Psychology
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Temple 1985, 1987, 1990) [2005]
BENJAMIN WALTER, Professor of Political Science, Emeritus
B.A. (Yale 1952); M.P.A. (Syracuse 1953); Ph.D. (Northwestern 1960)
[1961]
GUOJUN WANG, Assistant Professor of Asian Studies
B.A., M.A. (Beijing Normal [China] 2006, 2009); Ph.D. (Yale 2015)
[2015]
PATRICIA A. WARD, Professor of French and Comparative Literature,
Emerita
A.B. (Eastern Nazarene 1962); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1964, 1968)
[1993]
JOHN WARREN, Lecturer in Art
B.F.A. (Emerson 2002); M.F.A. (California Institute of the Arts 2012)
[2013]
CYNTHIA M. WASICK, Senior Lecturer in Spanish
B.A., M.A. (Wisconsin 1983, 1985) [1993]
DAVID J. WASSERSTEIN, Eugene Greener, Jr., Chair in Jewish Studies;
Professor of History
B.A., M.A., D.Phil. (Oxford [U.K.] 1974, 1977, 1982) [2004]
JONATHAN M. WATERS, Senior Lecturer in Cinema and Media Arts;
Assistant Director of Cinema and Media Arts
B.A. (Webster [Saint Louis] 2005); M.F.A. (Syracuse 2009) [2012]
FRANCIS W. WCISLO, Associate Professor of History
B.A. (Michigan 1973); M.A., M.Phil., Ph.D. (Columbia 1977, 1984,
1984) [1984]
HAROLD L. WEATHERBY, JR., Professor of English, Emeritus
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1956); M.A., Ph.D. (Yale 1957, 1962); D.Litt. (hon.,
Episcopal Theological Seminary 1973) [1962]
GLENN F. WEBB, Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1965); M.S., Ph.D. (Emory 1966,
1968) [1968]
MEDFORD S. WEBSTER, Professor of Physics, Emeritus
B.S. (Union College [New York] 1953); Ph.D. (Washington University
1959) [1967]
KEITH WEGHORST, Assistant Professor of Political Science
B.A. (Northwestern 2006); M.A. (California, Los Angeles 2008); M.A.,
Ph.D. (Florida 2011, 2013) [2013]
QING WEI, Lecturer in Chinese
B.A. (Fudan [China] 1988); M.A. (Colorado 1999) [2003]
THOMAS JOSEPH WEILER, Professor of Physics
B.S. (Stanford 1971); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1976) [1984]
DAVID A. WEINTRAUB, Professor of Astronomy; Director, Program in
Communication of Science and Technology
B.S. (Yale 1980); M.S., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1982, 1989)
[1991]
KIMBERLY WELCH, Assistant Professor of History; Assistant Professor of
Law
B.A. (Fort Lewis 2000); M.A. (American 2006); Ph.D. (Maryland 2012)
[2016]
ROBERT A. WELLER, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus and
Professor of Materials Science and Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of
Physics, Emeritus; Research Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee 1971); Ph.D. (California Institute of Technology 1978)
[1987]
ALEXIS S. WELLS, Assistant Professor of Religious Studies; Assistant
Professor of History
B.A. (Spelman 2004); M.Div., Ph.D. (Emory 2007, 2015) [2015]
MEIKE G.J. WERNER, Associate Professor of German; Associate
Professor of European Studies
M.A. (Washington University 1980); M.Phil., Ph.D. (Yale 1991, 1995)
[1997]
STEVEN A. WERNKE, Associate Professor of Anthropology
B.A. (Iowa 1992); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1996, 2003) [2005]
ISAAC WEST, Associate Professor of Communication Studies
B.A., M.A. (Kansas State 1999, 2001); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington
2008) [2015]

College of Arts and Science / Administration and Faculty
FRED M. WESTFIELD, Professor of Economics, Emeritus
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1950); Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1957) [1965]
DIANA N. WEYMARK, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.A., M.A. (Dalhousie [Canada] 1978, 1980); Ph.D. (British Columbia
[Canada] 1990) [1999]
JOHN A. WEYMARK, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of
Economics
B.A. (British Columbia [Canada] 1972); A.M., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1973,
1977) [1999]
GEORGINA WHITE, Lecturer in Classical and Mediterranean Studies
B.A., M.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 2008); M.A. (Pennsylvania 2009); M.A., Ph.D.
(Princeton 2013, 2015) [2017]
GILMAN W. WHITING, Associate Professor of African American and
Diaspora Studies
B.A. (Rhode Island 1985); M.A. (Rhode Island College 1994); Ph.D.
(Purdue 2004) [2004]
DEAN P. WHITTIER, Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus
B.S. (Massachusetts 1957); A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard 1959, 1961) [1965]
HERBERT WIESMEYER, Associate Professor of Molecular Biology,
Emeritus
B.S. (Illinois 1954); Ph.D. (Washington University 1959) [1962]
JOHN P. WIKSWO, JR., Gordon A. Cain University Professor; A. B.
Learned Professor of Living State Physics; Professor of Biomedical
Engineering; Professor of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics
B.A. (Virginia 1970); M.S., Ph.D. (Stanford 1973, 1975) [1977]
HORACE E. WILLIAMS, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Vanderbilt 1953, 1957); M.S. (Peabody 1957); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 1962) [1958]
Rhonda Y. Williams, John L. Seigenthaler, Jr., Chair in American
History
B.S. (Maryland 1989); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1998) [2017]
ROBLEY C. WILLIAMS, JR., Professor of Biological Sciences, Emeritus
A.B. (Cornell 1962); Ph.D. (Rockefeller 1967) [1976]
SUSAN FORD WILTSHIRE, Professor of Classics, Emerita
B.A. (Texas 1963); M.A., Ph.D. (Columbia 1964, 1967) [1971]
DONALD L. WINTERS, Professor of History, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Northern Iowa 1957, 1963); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1966) [1970]
ALAN E. WISEMAN, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of Political
Science; Associate Professor of Law
B.A. (Illinois, Champaign 1996); M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 1999, 2001)
[2010]
MARK ALLEN WOELFLE, Senior Lecturer in Biological Sciences
B.S. (Texas A&M 1983); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1993) [1993]
MARK A. WOLLAEGER, Professor of English
A.B. (Stanford 1979); Ph.D. (Yale 1986) [1994]
Thilo Womelsdorf, Associate Professor of Psychology
MSc. (Rhur [Germany] 2001); Ph.D. (Georg-August [Germany] 2004)
[2017]
DAVID C. WOOD, W. Alton Jones Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (Manchester [U.K.] 1968); Ph.D. (Warwick [U.K.] 1985) [1994]
DUSTIN A. WOOD, Senior Lecturer in Communication Studies
B.A. (Western Kentucky 2007); M.A. (Cincinnati 2009); Ph.D. (Texas
A&M 2013) [2014]
MYRNA HOLTZ WOODERS, Professor of Economics
B.A. (Alberta [Canada] 1969); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1976) [2004]
GEOFFREY F. WOODMAN, Associate Professor of Psychology
B.A., Ph.D. (Iowa 1997, 2002) [2006]
LAURIE ELIZABETH WOODS, Lecturer in Sociology
B.A. (Trevecca Nazarene 1997); M.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1999);
M.L.A.S., M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2000, 2002, 2008) [2008]
NEIL DAVID WOODWARD, Bixler-Johnson-Mayes Chair; Associate
Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; Associate Professor
of Psychology
B.S. (Alberta [Canada] 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2003, 2007)
[2009]
GRACE WORK, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Wheaton 2007); M.S. (City College of New York 2009); Ph.D.
(Illinois, Champaign 2016) [2016]

239
DAVID W. WRIGHT, Dean of Sciences; Stevenson Chair in Chemistry
B.A., B.S. (Tulane 1988, 1988); Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 1993) [2001]
EDWARD WRIGHT-RIOS, Professor of History
B.S. (Illinois, Champaign 1987); M.A. (Vanderbilt 1998); Ph.D. (California,
San Diego 2004) [2004]
YIXIANG WU, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Central South University of Technology [China] 2010); Ph.D.
(Louisiana, Lafayette 2015) [2016]
JULIAN WUERTH, Associate Professor of Philosophy
B.A. (Chicago 1993); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 2000) [2009]
DAOXING XIA, Professor of Mathematics, Emeritus
B.S. (Shandong University of Technology [China] 1950); Doctorate
(Zhejiang [China] 1952) [1984]
YAQIONG XU, Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering; Associate
Professor of Physics
B.S. (Wuhan [China] 1997); Ph.D. (Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 2002); Ph.D. (Rice 2006) [2009]
ANNA CATESBY YANT, Senior Lecturer in Anthropology; Assistant Director
of the Center for Pre-major Academic Advising and Support
M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006, 2011) [2011]
MARY ZABORSKIS, Senior Lecturer in Women’s and Gender Studies
A.B., (Bryn Mawr 2013); M.A., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 2013, 2017) [2017]
DAVID HAROLD ZALD, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
Psychology; Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; Director
of Neuroscience
B.A. (Michigan 1989); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1997) [2000]
ANDRES ZAMORA, Professor of Spanish; Vice Chair of the Department of
Spanish and Portuguese
B.A. (Universidad Complutense de Madrid [Spain] 1984); M.A. (Auburn,
Montgomery 1986); Ph.D. (Southern California 1994) [1998]
Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.S. (Cornell 2008); M.S., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2011, 2014)
[2017]
ELIZABETH ZECHMEISTER, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
Political Science; Director of the Latin American Public Opinion Project
(LAPOP)
B.A. (Loyola 1994); M.A. (Chicago 1996); Ph.D. (Duke 2003) [2008]
CHRISTOPH MIRKO ZELLER, Associate Professor of German; Associate
Professor of European Studies
M.A., Ph.D. (Universität Stuttgart [Germany] 1995, 1998) [2004]
DECHAO ZHENG, Professor of Mathematics
B.S. (Chongqing [China] 1982); M.S. (Sichuan University [China] 1985);
Ph.D. (Michigan State 1998) [1996]
DENIS A. ZHERNOKLEYEV, Lecturer in Russian
B.A. (Fresno Pacific 2006); M.Div. (Yale 2010); Ph.D. (Princeton 2016)
[2016]
RUTH GRACE ZIBART, Professor of French, Emerita
B.S. (Tennessee Technological 1941); M.A. (Vanderbilt 1942); Ph.D.
(Michigan 1964) [1964]
MELVIN ZIEGLER, Paul E. Shwab Chair in Fine Arts; Professor of Art
B.F.A. (Kansas City Art Institute 1978); M.F.A. (California Institute of the
Arts 1982) [2007]
GRETCHEN SUSAN SELCKE Zimmerman, Senior Lecturer in Latino and
Latina Studies; Assistant Director of Latino and Latina Studies
B.A. (Bowdoin 2000); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2010, 2015) [2015]
ARIELL ZIMRAN, Assistant Professor of Economics
B.S.F.S. (Georgetown 2010); M.A., Ph.D. (Northwestern 2011, 2016)
[2016]
LAURENCE J. ZWIEBEL, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Biological Sciences;
Professor of Pharmacology
B.S. (Stony Brook 1980); M.S. (Michigan 1982); Ph.D. (Brandeis 1992)
[1998]

A&S

Blair School
of Music
B

Music at Vanderbilt

242

Classes for the General Student    	

242

The Degree Program
Bachelor of Music Degree Requirements   	
Liberal Arts Core   	
Minor Area and Concentration Requirements  	
Teacher Education   	
3+2 B.Mus./MBA Blair-to-Owen Program

246
246
251
252
253
254

Special Programs   	

256

Academic Regulations   	

257

Honors   	

264

Courses   	

266

Administration and Faculty   	

282

242

vanderbilt university

Music at Vanderbilt

B

LAIR School of Music serves as the focal point at
Vanderbilt for the study of music as a human endeavor
and as a performing art. The school contributes to the
quality of life at the university through concerts, lectures, and
recitals by faculty, students, and visiting artists, scholars, and
composers, and through course offerings in performance,
music literature/history, composition, and theory. In an age
of increasing technology and social complexity, music offers
to persons of all ages a vital medium for the expression of the
human spirit.
The Blair School has been an integral part of Nashville’s
musical environment since its founding in 1964 by the Justin
and Valere Potter Foundation through a bequest of Valere
Blair Potter. In 1981 the school was merged with Vanderbilt
following the university’s decision to develop an excellent
program in music. Studies leading to the professional Bachelor
of Music degree in performance were initiated in 1986.
The degree program also includes majors in composition
and musical arts. The major in composition emphasizes analytical skills as well as the development of students’ creativity.
The major in musical arts lays a solid foundation in the art of
music, with equal preparation in the three basic disciplines of
performance, theory, and music literature/history. The musical arts major also forms the basis for a five-year program in
teacher education offered cooperatively with Peabody College.
Students in this curriculum can earn the B.Mus. degree in four
years and the M.Ed. and teacher licensure for instrumental/
general or vocal/general music in the fifth year (June–May).
All Blair degree programs are accredited by the National
Association of Schools of Music (NASM).
A non-professional 31-hour liberal arts music major makes
it possible for students outside the Blair School to choose
music as a second major. Students in other schools and
colleges of the university also may pursue a minor in music,
music composition, music history, or music performance.
And Blair offers a remarkable variety of electives for students
who wish to enrich their studies with credit in music courses,
ensembles, or performance instruction, or to select music as
an extracurricular activity.
Blair School of Music is home to internationally known
faculty soloists and ensembles, and Blair’s performers, composers, and musicologists are among the most respected in
their fields. Members of the faculty ensembles (Blair String
Quartet, Blair Woodwind Quintet, Blair Brass Quintet, and
Blakemore Trio) provide private instruction and coach chamber music ensembles and performance classes. The faculty's
dedication to teaching and a low student/faculty ratio provide
students the personal attention that fosters maximum musical growth and understanding. The school is committed to its
goal of developing students who are among the most articulate,
culturally aware, and artistically sensitive of any graduates in
the country.
Facilities
The Blair building incorporates innovative developments in
acoustical design and engineering. It contains teaching studios
and faculty offices, classrooms, rehearsal halls, practice rooms,
library, administrative offices, MIDI piano labs with individual

computer workstations, and concert venues. The 272-seat Steve
and Judy Turner Recital Hall is the locus for student recitals
and concerts and master classes by faculty members and visiting
artists held on a regular basis. It also houses the Dobson Organ
Opus 92 (2014), designed in the tradition of eighteenth-century
eastern German organs not unlike those Bach knew, with
additions and accommodations for twenty-first century use.
Opened in spring 2002, the 609-seat Ingram Hall garnered
immediate acclaim for its superb acoustics, its visual beauty,
and its enhancement of the school’s ability to host and produce
orchestra, opera, and other major concert events.
The Anne Potter Wilson Music Library is a division of
the Jean and Alexander Heard Library system. The collection,
begun in 1947, was moved from Peabody College to its new
and permanent home at Blair in the summer of 1985. Named
to honor Anne Potter Wilson by the Vanderbilt Board of Trust
in 1987, the 8,000-square-foot library holds more than 95,000
books, scores, sound and video recordings, and subscriptions
to journals and online music databases. It is equipped with
a seminar room, listening and viewing stations, computer
workstations, and study facilities. Music librarians and staff
are available to answer reference inquiries and to assist users
with locating resources for performance, study, or instruction.
Accreditation
All programs leading to the B.Mus. degree are accredited by
the National Association of Schools of Music, 11250 Roger
Bacon Drive, Suite 21, Reston, VA 20190-5248; telephone:
(703) 437-0700.

Classes for the General Student
The Blair School of Music welcomes the general student into
its classes and studios. A large number of courses are designed
specifically for non-majors. Many classes are held in Sarratt
Cinema, Alumni Hall, and other central campus locations.
Non-majors may also participate in any and all music major
courses for which they are qualified.
A wide variety of music courses fulfill liberal arts core
requirements for undergraduates in the College of Arts and
Science, the School of Engineering, and Peabody College.
These are listed by course numbers in each school’s/college’s
section of this catalog, where requirements outlining Arts
and Science AXLE, Engineering liberal arts core, or Peabody
liberal education core requirements are given. Requirements
and the courses which fulfill them differ for each Vanderbilt
school.
Courses of particular interest to the general student are:
First-Year Writing Seminars*
Music and Global Health
Music and Modernism
Shakespeare and Music

MUSL 1111 [W, INT]
MUSL 1111 [W, HCA]
MUSL 1111 [W, HCA]

Music Composition and Theory
Music Theory (Survey of)
MUTH 1200-1210
Nashville Number System, The MUTH 1130
Songwriting and Elements of
		 Music Theory
MUTH 1120

Blair School of Music / Music at Vanderbilt

Songwriting II
Advanced Lyric Writing
for Songwriters
Music Literature and History*
African Music
American Music
American Popular Music
Blues, The
Choral Music (Survey of)
Concerto, The
Country Music
Exploring the Film Soundtrack
Introduction to
		 Music Literature
Jazz (Survey of)
Love and Death in Music
Music City Museums and
		 Memorabilia
Music, Gender, and Sexuality
Music, Identity, and Diversity
Music in Latin America and
		 the Caribbean
Music of the South
Music, the Arts, and Ideas
Musical Theatre in America
Opera
Rock Music (History of)
Symphony, The
Women and Music
Women and Rock Music
World Music
Other Courses
Building Communities Through
		 Music and the Arts
Arts Administration
Creating Mission-Driven Arts
		 and Social Programming
Business of Music, The
Music Internships

MUTH 1125
MUSO 1230
MUSL 1105 [INT]
MUSL 2600 [US]
MUSL 1600 [US]
MUSL 1630 [US]
MUSL 1230 [HCA]
MUSL 1210 [HCA]
MUSL 1640 [US]
MUSL 2329 [US]
MUSL 1200 [HCA]
MUSL 1620 [US]
MUSL 1310 [HCA]
MUSL 1660 [HCA]
MUSL 3150 [P]
MUSL 2150 [P]
MUSL 2110 [INT]
MUSL 2610 [US]
MUSL 1300 [HCA]
MUSL 1610 [HCA]
MUSL 3220, 3221 [HCA]
MUSL 1650 [HCA]
MUSL 1220 [HCA]
MUSL 3155 [P]
MUSL 3160 [HCA]
MUSL 1100 [INT]

MENT 1130
MENT 1135
MENT 1140
MENT 1120
MENT 3880, 3881, 3882

*The bracketed letters indicate categories of the Arts and
Science AXLE curriculum, which may also be verified in the
Arts and Science section of the catalog. These designations
are as follows: Humanities and the Creative Arts [HCA];
International Cultures [INT]; History and Culture of the
United States [US]; Social and Behavioral Sciences [SBS]; and
Perspectives [P].

Composition/Theory, Musicianship, and Keyboard
Harmony
Courses designed for the general university student (MUTH
1120, 1125, 1130, 1200, 1210) focus on the recognition of stylistic
and structural patterns. This skill enhances the non-technical
listener’s awareness—both analytical and affective—of creative
expression in music.
The music theory and musicianship sequence (MUTH 21002400; MUSC 2100-2400) introduces serious students of music,
whether majors or not, to the principles of harmony, voiceleading, counterpoint, structure, and analytical/ compositional
techniques in a variety of historical styles; further, it fosters the
all-important skills of hearing tonal relationships with facility

243

and of communicating orally the structures and materials of
music.

Ensembles
The Blair School of Music sponsors several major performing ensembles, including the Vanderbilt Symphonic Choir,
Vanderbilt Chorale, Orchestra, Wind Ensemble, Opera Theatre,
and Jazz Band. Other non-western and vernacular ensembles,
such as the African Performing Ensemble and the Steel Drum/
Pan Ensemble, are also available for credit. A large number of
smaller ensembles and chamber music groups also exist, offering students a wide variety of experiences.
Auditions. Auditions for the major performing ensembles
are held at the beginning of each semester. Audition information can be found on the Blair School of Music website.
Students must audition every semester unless excused.
Assignment is at the discretion of the director. Openings at
mid-year are not guaranteed. Students need the approval of
the appropriate faculty chamber music coordinator before
enrolling in chamber music; if participation has not been
discussed with the coach, students may register tentatively for
the “to be assigned” section of chamber music. Openings are
not guaranteed.
Credit. Students may register for course credit. Audit status
or registration for zero hours may be possible with permission
of the director.

Music Literature and History
Courses in the literature and history of music are designed to
develop students’ understanding of music within the prevailing social and cultural contexts; to establish a framework for
critical evaluation of music and musical practices; to achieve a
working familiarity with recognized, or at least representative,
masterworks of musical literature; to develop students’ ability
to speak articulately about the styles and substance of music;
and to equip students with analytic and literary skills and with
a working knowledge of the bibliography of music.

Performance
Performance instruction in individual or group settings is
available for university credit for an additional fee. Private
instruction is offered in all orchestral instruments and in piano,
organ, guitar, dulcimer, mandolin, saxophone, euphonium,
fiddle, banjo, steel drum/pan, and voice. Credit is flexible, but
beginning students may register for only 1 credit hour. Students
contract with the private instructor regarding lesson length
and practice hours and can earn either 1 or 2 credit hours each
semester. Students in the School of Engineering can count 3
hours of performance instruction (or ensembles) towards liberal arts core requirements. For others, performance is elective
credit. Group instruction is offered in piano, guitar, steel pan/
drum, and percussion; groups have maximum of six students
and earn 1 credit hour.
Group Performance Instruction: Non-Major
Group instruction is designed for beginning students with
emphasis on basic technique, rhythm, tone, and musical
interpretation. Groups are limited to six students.
Registration. New students must interview with the appropriate faculty member before finalizing registration. Instructions are given in the online registration system.

B

244

vanderbilt university

Fees. Music fees are in addition to tuition charges and are
not refundable after the change period. The cost for group
instruction is $810.00 per semester for one 50-minute lesson
weekly. (Fees, set annually by the Board of Trust, are subject to
review and change without further notice.)
Individual Performance Instruction
Individual instruction is focused on the art and practice of an
instrument or voice, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Blair offers collegiatelevel performance instruction for non-majors at the 1100 level.
2100-, 2200-, 4100- and 4200-level courses are open only to
B.Mus. students.
Registration. New students must interview with the appropriate faculty member before finalizing registration. Information is available in YES. Enrollments are limited.
Credit. University students enrolled in individual instruction may earn 1 or 2 credit hours depending on lesson length
and practice commitment.
• 30-minute or 45-minute lessons with 5 hours minimum
weekly practice earn 1 credit hour.
• 60-minute lessons with 10 hours minimum weekly
		 practice earn 2 credit hours.
• Beginners may not register for more than 1 hour of
		credit.
Fees. Music fees are charged in addition to regular tuition,
and are not refundable after the change period. Students
receiving need-based financial aid may request that music fees
be considered in their financial aid package. Students with
a declared second major or minor in music will be charged
approximately one-half the music performance instruction fee.
For instrument courses numbered 1100, fees per semester are
as follows:
		

		
		
One 30-minute lesson weekly
One 45-minute lesson weekly
One 60-minute lesson weekly

Elective Credit /
Non–Blair Students
$1,045
$1,470
$1,840

2nd majors and
minors receive
50% discount

Fees, set annually by the Board of Trust, are subject to
review and change without further notice.
Music Minors
Students may elect one of four minors: music, music composition, music history, or music performance. Formal admission
to the general minor, the performance minor, or the second
major is contingent upon a performance audition that meets
departmental standards for the intermediate or advanced level
of study. Following interviews with the appropriate department, students plan their studies with Blair advisers. Contact
information and declaration paperwork are available online:
blair.vanderbilt.edu. Students must complete all requirements
for the music minors with standard grading basis (that is, not
Pass/Fail).
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Music Minor. 24 or 25 hours.

Music Theory. 6 or 7 hours.
MUTH 1200-1210; or MUTH 2100-MUSC 2100 and
MUTH 2200-MUSC 2200

Music Literature/History. 12 hours.
MUSL 2200W or 1200
One course chosen from: MUTH 3890, MUSL 1111-02
(Shakespeare and Music), 1210, 1220, 1230, 3220-3240,
and, with approval of department chair, 3890
One course chosen from: MUSL 1111-01 (Music and Global
Health), MUSL 1111-03 (Music and Modernism), MUSL
1111-04 (Music, Identity, and Diversity), 1100, 1105, 3155,
3150, 3220-3240, 2110, 2150, 2610, and 3890
One course chosen from: MUTH 3890 or any MUSL
course
Performance. 4 hours.
Individual performance instruction in a single instrument
for at least 4 semesters (any orchestral instrument,
piano, organ, guitar, saxophone, euphonium, voice, or
JAZZ 1100).
Students must meet minimum standards and obtain the
approval of the appropriate department chair (brass/
percussion, guitar/harp, keyboard, strings, voice, woodwinds, jazz). Declaration forms are available in the Blair
office and online at blair.vanderbilt.edu/academics.
Ensemble. 2 hours (2 different semesters).
Participation for two semesters in an appropriate performing ensemble, after consultation with the minor adviser.
Music History Minor. 18 or 19 hours.

Music Theory. 6 or 7 hours.
MUTH 1200-1210; or MUTH 2100-MUSC 2100 and
MUTH 2200-MUSC 2200
Music Literature/History. 12 hours.
MUSL 2100, MUSL 2200W*, one course from 3220-3240,
and 3100.
*Students who have completed MUSL 1200 must substitute another course for
MUSL 2200W, selected from MUSL 1610, 1210, 1220, 1230, 2600, 1620, 1600,
1630, 1640, 1650, 1100, 1105, 1300, 3155, 3150, 3220-3240, 2110, 3160, 2150,
2610, 2320, 1660, or 3890.

Music Composition Minor. 26 hours.

Music Theory. 13 hours.
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400; MUSC 2100, 2200
Music Literature/History. 6 hours.
MUSL 1200 or 2200W, 3100
Composition. 7 hours.
COMP 1100; COMP 2100 (4 semesters)
Formal admission into the music composition minor requires
departmental approval. Applicants should submit a
composition portfolio consisting of three completed works,
with scores and recordings (MIDI is acceptable) to the
Composition and Theory Department Chair.
Music Performance Minor. 25 or 26 hours.

Music Theory. 6 or 7 hours.
MUTH 1200-1210; or MUTH 2100-MUSC 2100 and
MUTH 2200-MUSC 2200
Music Literature/History. 6 hours.
MUSL 2200W or 1200
One course chosen from MUSL 3220-3240

Blair School of Music / Music at Vanderbilt

Performance. 11 hours.
Individual instruction in a single instrument for at least
6 semesters (any orchestral instrument, piano, organ,
guitar, saxophone, euphonium, or voice.)
Students must meet minimum performance standards for
admission to the program, earning a total of 11 hours.
Repertoire information and declaration forms are available in the Blair office and online at blair.vanderbilt.
edu/academics.
Ensemble. 2 hours (two different semesters).
Participation for two semesters in an appropriate performing ensemble, as assigned following audition. String,
woodwind, brass, percussion, and harp students must
audition for MUSE 1010, Instrumental Ensemble. Guitar and voice students must audition for MUSE 1020,
Symphonic Choir. Keyboard students must participate
as a pianist for one semester in MUSE 2300, 2310, 2320,
2330, 2210, 2230, or 2272; or in 1010, 1020, 1030, 2120,
or 1140, contingent upon permission of the ensemble
instructor and the piano instructor.
Music as a Second Major
Blair offers a non-professional liberal arts major in music that
requires a minimum of 31 hours. Designed jointly by Blair and
the College of Arts and Science, it is also available to Peabody
and Engineering students as a second major. Following interviews with the appropriate performance department, students
plan their studies with Blair adviser Professor Carl Smith, coordinator of the program. Contact information and declaration
paperwork are available online: blair.vanderbilt.edu. Students
must complete all requirements for the music as a second
major with standard grading basis (that is, not Pass/Fail).
Music Major (Second Major). 31 hours.

Music Theory. 12 hours.
MUTH 2100-MUSC 2100, MUTH 2200-MUSC 2200,
MUTH 2300-MUSC 2300, and MUSC 2400.
Music Literature/History. 9 hours.
MUSL 2100, 2200W*, 3100.
*Students who have completed MUSL 1200 must take an additional course instead
of MUSL 2200W, selected from MUSL 3220-3240.

Individual Performance Instruction. 6 hours.
Six semesters of study in any orchestral instrument, piano,
organ, guitar, saxophone, euphonium, or voice.
Students must meet minimum performance standards for
admission to the program, with the required 6 hours at
a level beyond that minimum. Representative repertoire
lists reflecting minimum performance standards and
required declaration forms are available online at blair.
vanderbilt.edu/academics or from either the Blair office
or Professor Carl Smith, coordinator of the program.
Ensemble. 2 hours (two different semesters).
Participation for two semesters in an appropriate performing ensemble, as assigned following audition. String,
woodwind, brass, percussion, and harp students must
audition for MUSE 1010, Instrumental Ensemble. Guitar and voice students must audition for MUSE 1020,
Symphonic Choir. Keyboard students must participate
as a pianist for one semester in MUSE 2300, 2310, 2320,
2330, 2210, 2230, or 2272; or in 1010, 1020, 1030, 2120,

245

or 1140, contingent upon permission of the ensemble
instructor and the piano instructor.
Elective. 2–3 hours.
One course in music theory, literature/history, or conducting, chosen from MUTH 2400, 3130, 3110, 3210, 3200,
3120, 3140, 3160, 3890; any MUSL; MCON 3000.

B

246

vanderbilt university

The Degree Program

TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340

T

ENSEMBLE. 10 hours minimum
MUSE 1010 (every semester in residence); MUSE 1150, 2210, 2250
or 2260 (four semesters, 1/2 credit minimum each semester, taken
both semesters of freshman year, with two additional courses taken
during career). Assignment to ensembles is at the discretion of the
directors. During study abroad, students may waive participation in
an ensemble of choice.

he bachelor of music degree program includes four
different majors: performance, composition, musical
arts, and the musical arts/teacher education track. The
performance major is available in any orchestral instrument,
piano, organ, classical guitar, saxophone, euphonium, and
voice. The composition major emphasizes both the creation
and analysis of music. The musical arts major provides a solid
foundation in the art of music and includes equal preparation in the three basic disciplines—theory, literature/history,
and performance. Students, excepting musical arts/teacher
education majors, may complete an optional concentration in
collaborative arts, composition, jazz, literature/history, pedagogy, or theory. The musical arts/teacher education program,
a five-year curriculum jointly developed with Peabody College,
is for students interested in earning the master of education
degree and teacher licensure in addition to the bachelor of
music degree. Through a dual B.Mus./MBA program, interested students in the musical arts major have an opportunity
to compress both the bachelor of music at the Blair School
of Music and the master of business administration at the
Owen Graduate School of Management into ten semesters in
residence. Application for this program is made early in the
fall semester of the junior year.

Bachelor of Music Degree Requirements
All bachelor of music degree candidates complete a program
designed to ensure an intense, yet broadly-based, understanding of the discipline of music, focused on the skills and knowledge students will need to succeed as informed musicians
of the twenty-first century. Each student must complete 126
credit hours, including 80 hours in music. The music core (42
credit hours minimum) includes music theory, musicianship,
keyboard harmony, music literature, conducting, technology for musicians, and ensemble. Each major has additional
specific requirements, including performance instruction
and other music courses (to fulfill 80 hours). Liberal arts
core requirements (minimum of 30 hours) include English,
the humanities, courses chosen from history or social science, mathematics or natural science, and academic electives.
Students may take free electives to total 126 hours. Sample
curriculum plans are in the Blair Student Handbook at blair.
vanderbilt.edu/academics.
Requirements by Major Area

INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
TRPT, HORN, TROM, EUPH, or TUBA 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. TRPT, HORN, TROM, or TUBA 1000 (every semester
in residence); MUSO 3970, 4970
OTHER MUSIC. MUSO 1120, MREP 2110
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours
COMPOSITION
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 8 hours minimum (every semester in residence)
Eight semesters selected with the adviser’s approval. Assignment to
ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad,
students may waive participation in an ensemble of choice.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 6 hours, 6 semesters
3 semesters in any orchestral instrument, piano, organ, harpsichord,
guitar, saxophone, euphonium, or voice (1100 level); 2 semesters chosen from any orchestral instrument, piano, organ, harpsichord, guitar,
saxophone, euphonium, or voice or MUED 1010-1040; 1 semester
chosen from any orchestral instrument, piano, organ, harpsichord,
guitar, saxophone, euphonium, voice (1100 level), or JAZZ 1100.

NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)

BRASS PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134

COMPOSITION. COMP 2301-2304, 4301-4304
Students rotate instructors as assigned for COMP 2301-2304 to gain
experience with 4 different members of the department. COMP 1100
may be substituted for Section 01 [Kurek} of COMP 2301 or Section 01
[Kurek} of COMP 2303. Students may select one or more instructors of
choice for COMP 4301-4304.

MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100

OTHER MUSIC. COMP 1000 (every semester in residence); MUTH 3110,
MUTH 3210 or 3220, COMP 3978, 4970

CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000

MUSIC ELECTIVES. To complete minimum of 80 hours in music

Blair School of Music / The Degree Program
LIBERAL ARTS. Must include one year of a foreign language, normally
French, German, or Italian. Another language appropriate to the student’s
musical pursuits may be chosen with approval of composition/ theory
department. Two (2) courses chosen from: 2000-level or higher art history,
2000-level or higher English, 2000-level or higher philosophy; a total of 33
hours, rather than 30, in liberal arts (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

GUITAR PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 8 hours minimum (every semester in residence)
MUSE 1020 or 2120 (two semesters), 1120 (two semesters), and 2330,
1120, or 2210 (four semesters). Students must audition for symphonic
choir each semester until requirements are fulfilled. Assignment to
ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad,
students may waive participation in an ensemble of choice.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
GTR 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. GTR 1000 (every semester in residence), MUSO 3970,
4970
OTHER MUSIC. MREP 3300, MPED 3100
MUSIC ELECTIVES. To complete minimum of 80 hours in music
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

HARP PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 10 hours minimum
MUSE 1010 (every semester in residence); MUSE 1130 or 2210 (four
semesters, 1/2 credit minimum each semester, taken both semesters of
freshman year, with two additional courses taken during career). Assign-

247
ment to ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study
abroad, students may waive participation in an ensemble of choice.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
HARP 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. HARP 1000 (every semester in residence), MUSO
3970, 4970
OTHER MUSIC. MREP 2130
MUSIC ELECTIVES. To complete minimum of 80 hours in music
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

MUSICAL ARTS
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 8-10 hours (every semester in residence)
Auditions for major ensembles are required each semester until
requirements are fulfilled. Assignment to ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad, students may waive participation in an ensemble of choice.
Strings, woodwinds, brass, harp, percussion—(10 hours minimum) Five semesters MUSE 1010 (including four semesters of
MUSE 1150, 1160, 1130, 1140, 2220, 2210, 2230, 2240, 2250,
or 2260, ½ credit minimum each semester, taken both semesters
of freshman year, with two additional courses taken during career);
and three semesters ensemble of choice.
Guitar—(8 hours) Two semesters MUSE 1020 or 2120, two
semesters 1120, one semester 1020, 2120, 2330, 1120, or 2210,
and three semesters ensemble of choice.
Organ—(8 hours) Three semesters of conducted choral ensemble, one semester of MUSE 2300, one semester of 2320, one
semester of 2310, and two semesters ensemble of choice.
Piano—(8 hours) One semester chosen from MUSE 1020,
2120, 1010, 1030, or other approved conducted choir; one semester of 2300; three semesters of 2320, 2330, 2210, 2310, or 2230;
three semesters ensemble of choice with adviser’s approval.
Voice—(8 hours) Eight semesters MUSE 1020 or 2120 as
assigned (or 2330 if demonstrated schedule conflict exists); juniors
or seniors cast in principal roles in MUSE 1030 (as defined by the
voice faculty) may substitute MUSE 1030 for one semester only of
MUSE 1020 or 2120.
Composition—(8 hours) Eight semesters, selected with adviser's
approval
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE or COMPOSITION (for composition
students) INSTRUCTION. 16 hours, 8 semesters (every semester in
residence)

B

248
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
COMPOSITION/THEORY, LITERATURE/HISTORY. 9-12 hours. Four
courses selected from MUSL and MUTH 3000- or 4000-level courses
in addition to the MUSL and MUTH core courses, including at least 3
hours MUSL, 2-3 hours MUTH, and 4-6 hours MUSL or MUTH
PERFORMANCE. Performance class (or composition studio class for
composers) every semester in residence if offered (BASS 1000, BSSN
1000, CLAR 1000, CLLO 1000, COMP 1000, FLUT 1000, GTR 1000,
HARP 1000, HORN 1000, OBOE 1000, PERC 1000, PIAN 1000,
SAX 1000, TROM 1000, TRPT 1000, TUBA 1000, VLA 1000, VLN
1000, VOIC 1000)
OTHER MUSIC. 3 hours. MUSO 1400, 1410, 1420 (required for voice
only); 4 hours of 1100-level performance instruction or MUED 10101040 and 3 hours MUTH 3110 (required for composition only); MUSO
1130 (required for percussion only)
MUSIC ELECTIVES. To complete a minimum of 80 hours in music.
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

MUSICAL ARTS/TEACHER EDUCATION, INSTRUMENTAL/GENERAL
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 9 hours minimum (every semester in residence) Instrumental ensemble and co-requisite chamber music are required both
semesters of freshman year, and a total of six semesters of conducted
ensemble (chosen from MUSE 1000, 1010, 1020, or 2120) and two
semesters of small ensemble is required. Instrumentalists must have
experience in orchestra, wind ensemble, jazz ensemble (as appropriate), and chamber music, with ensemble enrollment required every
semester and every module in residence. Pianists must be accepted in
MUSE 1010, 1020, or 2120 by the beginning of the second semester.
During study abroad, a student could choose to waive an ensemble of
choice. Auditions for major ensembles are required each semester until
requirements are fulfilled. Assignment to ensembles is at the discretion
of the directors.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 16 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)

vanderbilt university
Intro to Guitar GTR 1010 or Classroom Instruments MUED 1050, but
no more than 1 semester in the area of the major instrument; may
include voice). Secondary Instrument Lab MUED 1070 one semester. Child and Adolescent Voices MUED 1060. Senior Recital MUSO
4970.
OTHER MUSIC. Instrumental Conducting MCON 3010.
Note: Conducting study must include two different professors.
TEACHING. Class Instruments MUED 1010, 1020, 1030, 1040. Practica
in Music Teaching MUED 3870, 3871, 3872. Two seminars chosen
from MUED 2110-2170.
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (and 9 hours listed above in Literature/History)
English/Writing: 6 hours, including MUSL 2200W and choice of
AP/IB English credit, any ENGL, or any writing course (any W in the
English language, any 1111, or ENGL 1100; must be from outside
of music).
Humanities: 6 hours, including MUSL 2100 and 3 hours in art
history, humanities, language, philosophy, or religious studies. (6
additional hours of humanities credit are counted above in Literature/History.)
History and Social Science: 6 hours, including 3 hours American
History and 3 hours in a social science discipline other than history
chosen from Anthropology, Economics, Political Science or Sociology. (3 additional hours of history and social science credit are
counted above in Literature/History.)
Mathematics and Natural Science: 6 or 7 hours, including 3
hours math, chosen from statistics (ECON 1500, MATH 1010 or
1011, PSY-PC 2110) or calculus (MATH 1100, 1200, 1201, 1300,
1301, 2200, 2300, 2500, 2501); and 3 or 4 hours any science
course with a lab.
Academic Electives: 6 hours, specifically EDUC 1220 and
SPED 1210. (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

MUSICAL ARTS/TEACHER EDUCATION, VOCAL/GENERAL
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 8 hours minimum (every semester in residence) 6 semesters
large ensemble (chosen from MUSE 1000, 1010, 1020, or 2120) and
2 semesters small ensemble. Juniors or seniors cast in principal roles
in MUSE 1030 (as defined by the voice faculty) may substitute MUSE
1030 for one semester only of MUSE 1020 or 2120. Pianists, vocalists,
and guitarists must have experience accompanying. All students must
have ensemble experience on their secondary instrument. Auditions
for major ensembles are required each semester until requirements
are fulfilled. Assignment to ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad, students may waive participation in an
ensemble of choice.

COMPOSITION/THEORY. MUTH 3110, COMP 1100
LITERATURE/HISTORY. MUSL 2600; choice of MUSL 1110, 3155,
3150, 2110, or 2150; choice of MUSL 1610, 1300, or 3220-3240.
PERFORMANCE. Performance class on primary instrument every
semester. Secondary instrument(s) three semesters (may include

INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 16 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)

Blair School of Music / The Degree Program
COMPOSITION/THEORY. COMP 1100 and choice of MUTH 3130 or
MUTH 3110
LITERATURE/HISTORY. MUSL 2600; choice of MUSL 1110, 3155,
3150, 2110, or 2150; choice of MUSL 1610, 1300, or 3220-3240 .
PERFORMANCE. Performance class on primary instrument every
semester if offered. Secondary instrument 4 semesters (voice for pianists and organists; piano for singers; voice or piano for guitarists or
other instrumentalists). MUED 1060 Child and Adolescent Voices (for
pianists, guitarists, other instrumentalists only; voice majors exempt).
Intro to Guitar GTR 1010 (guitar majors exempt). Senior Recital
MUSO 4970.
OTHER MUSIC. MCON 3020 Choral Conducting. MUSO 1400 Diction
for Singers: English and Italian; MUSO 1410 Diction for Singers:
German; MUSO 1420 Diction for Singers: French (required for voice
majors only; it is recommended that MUSO 1400, MUSO 1410 and
MUSO 1420 be taken in sequence in the first three semesters).
TEACHING. Teaching: Intro to Classroom Instruments MUED 1050;
Practica in Music Teaching MUED 3870, 3871, 3872. Two seminars
chosen from MUED 2110-2170.
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (and 9 hours listed above in Literature/History)
English/Writing: 6 hours, including MUSL 2200W and choice of
AP/IB English credit, any ENGL, or any writing course (any W in the
English language, any 1111, or ENGL 1100; must be from outside
of music).
Humanities: 6 hours, including MUSL 2100 and 3 hours in art
history, humanities, language, philosophy, or religious studies. (6
additional hours of humanities credit are counted above in Literature/History.)
History and Social Science: 6 hours, including 3 hours American History and 3 hours in a social science discipline other than
history chosen from Anthropology, Economics, Political Science or
Sociology. (3 additional hours of history and social science credit
are counted above in Literature/History.)
Mathematics and Natural Science: 6 or 7 hours, including 3 hours
math, chosen from statistics (ECON 1500, MATH 1010 or 1011, PSYPC 2110) or calculus (MATH 1100, 1200, 1201, 1300, 1301, 2200,
2300, 2500, 2501); and 3 or 4 hours any science course with a lab.
Academic Electives: 6 hours, specifically EDUC 1220 and
SPED 1210. (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

ORGAN PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 8 hours minimum (every semester in residence)
MUSE 1010 or 2120 (four semesters); 2320 (one semester); 2320,
2330, 2210 or 2310 (one semester); and ensemble of choice (two
semesters). Assignment to ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad, students may waive participation in an
ensemble of choice.

249
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
ORGN 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. MUSO 3970, 4970
OTHER MUSIC. Organ Literature and Organ Pedagogy
MUSIC ELECTIVES. To complete minimum of 80 hours in music
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours
PERCUSSION PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 10 hours minimum
MUSE 1010 (every semester in residence); MUSE 1140, 2220, or
2210 (four semesters, 1/2 credit minimum each semester, taken both
semesters of freshman year, with two additional courses taken during
career). Assignment to ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad, students may waive participation in an
ensemble of choice.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
PERC 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. PERC 1000 (every semester in residence), MUSO
3970, 4970
OTHER MUSIC. MUSO 1130, MREP 2120 or 2121
MUSIC ELECTIVES. To complete minimum of 80 hours in music
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

PIANO PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 2133 and 2134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100

B

250
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000

vanderbilt university
MUSIC ELECTIVES. To complete minimum of 80 hours in music
LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours (see full requirements below)

TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 8 hours minimum (every semester in residence)
MUSE 2300 (one semester), 2320 (one semester), 2310 (one
semester), conducted ensemble 1020, 2120, 1010, 1030, or other
approved conducted choir (one semester), and choice of 1010,
1020, 1030, 1140, 1310, 2120, 2320, 2330, 2210, 2310, or 2230
(four semesters). Participation in 1010 or 1030 is contingent upon
approval of ensemble conductor and piano instructor. Assignment to
ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad,
students may waive participation in an ensemble of choice.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
PIAN 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. PIAN 1000 (every semester in residence), MUSO 3970,
4970
OTHER MUSIC. MREP 3310, 3311, MPED 3110
LIBERAL ARTS CORE. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

STRING PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134

FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours
VOICE PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134
MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100
CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000
TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 8 hours minimum (every semester in residence)
Eight semesters MUSE 1020 or 2120 as assigned (or 2330 if demonstrated schedule conflict exists); juniors or seniors cast in principal
roles in MUSE 1030 (as defined by the voice faculty) may substitute
MUSE 1030 for one semester only of MUSE 1020 or 2120. During
study abroad, students may waive participation in an ensemble of
choice.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 28 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
VOIC 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. PIAN 1100 (two semesters); VOIC 1000 (every semester in residence); MUSO 3970, 4970

MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100

OTHER MUSIC. MUSO 1400, 1410, 1420, MREP 3330, MPED 3130

CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000

LIBERAL ARTS. 30 hours, including 6-10 hours (two semesters) chosen
from French, German, and Italian (see full requirements below)

TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340

FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

ENSEMBLE. 10 hours minimum
MUSE 1010 (every semester in residence); MUSE 2210, 2230, or
2240 (four semesters, 1/2 credit minimum each semester, taken both
semesters of freshman year, with two additional courses taken during
career). All students except double bass majors must have experience in string quartet (MUSE 2240). Assignment to ensembles is at
the discretion of the directors. During study abroad, students may
waive participation in an ensemble of choice.

WOODWIND PERFORMANCE
MUSIC THEORY, MUSICIANSHIP, AND KEYBOARD HARMONY. 19 hours
MUTH 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUSC 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400
MUKH 1131, 1132, 1133, and 1134

INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
VLN, VLA, CLLO, or BASS 2200, 4200

CONDUCTING. 2 hours
MCON 3000

RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. VLN, VLA, CLLO, or BASS 1000 (every semester in
residence); MUSO 3970, 4970
OTHER MUSIC. MREP 2130

MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 12 hours
MUSL 2100, 2200W, one course chosen from 3220-3240, 3100

TECHNOLOGY. 1 hour
MUSO 1340
ENSEMBLE. 10 hours minimum
MUSE 1010 (every semester in residence); MUSE 1160, 2210, or
2260 (four semesters, 1/2 credit minimum each semester, taken both
semesters of freshman year, with two additional courses taken during
career). Assignment to ensembles is at the discretion of the directors. During study abroad, students may waive participation in an
ensemble of choice.

Blair School of Music / The Degree Program
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE INSTRUCTION. 32 hours, 8 semesters
(every semester in residence)
FLUT, OBOE, CLAR, BSSN, SAX 2200; 4200
RECITAL ATTENDANCE. No credit
MUSO 1000 (every semester in residence except penultimate or final
semester)
PERFORMANCE. FLUT, OBOE, CLAR, BSSN, SAX 1000 (every semester in residence); MUSO 3970, 4970
OTHER MUSIC. MREP 2140 (flute, oboe, clarinet, and bassoon)
or MREP 2141 (saxophone); MPED 3140 (section appropriate for
major instrument)
LIBERAL ARTS CORE. 30 hours (see full requirements below)
FREE ELECTIVES. To complete 126 hours

Liberal Arts Core
The liberal arts core affords music students the opportunity to
develop a broad-based understanding of intellectual endeavors
and methods in a variety of disciplines, to explore the interconnectedness of music, arts, and other humanistic pursuits, and to
articulate their thinking in clear and effective language. The curriculum, which provides maximum flexibility for each student,
requires a minimum of 30 hours (33 hours for composition
majors), satisfied through required categories as noted below.
Students electing a second major outside of music complete
only the Blair liberal arts core; they are not expected to fulfill the
core requirements (such as AXLE) of another Vanderbilt school
or college. Hours earned toward the Blair liberal arts core may
also be counted toward a second major or minor, if appropriate.
Students admitted with a deficiency relative to high school credits must plan their liberal arts work to overcome the deficiency.
1001 courses do not count for liberal arts core credit.
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

English/writing (6 hours)
Students must complete writing course MUSL 2200W during the first
year. A second English/writing course* of at least three credit hours,
chosen from:
• Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate credits in
English/ Writing (consult the chapter on Admission for current policy)
• First year writing seminars (1111) in any discipline
• Writing courses in the English language in any discipline, designated by W in the course number.
• English: all courses
• Communication Studies: 1500, 1850
• MUSL 2330
For musical arts/teacher education majors, an English/writing course
outside of music is required.
*Students with a score of 770 on the Evidence-Based Reading and Writing portions of the SAT with a minimum score of 39 in the Writing and
Language portion, or with a score of 35 on the Reading and Writing
portions of the ACT, may exempt the second English/writing course,
substituting 3 hours of any academic elective. Students who do not
present a score of 660 on the Evidence-Based Reading and Writing
section of the SAT test (with a score of 27 in Reading and 28 in Writing and Language), or a score of 30 on the English portion of the ACT
test, must enroll in English 1100 in the first semester.

251

Humanities (9 hours)
HUMANITIES REQUIREMENTS
MUSL 2100. Students should complete this required course during the
first year.
Six additional hours of humanities electives (listed below)
For composition majors, 15 hours minimum, including MUSL 2100: one
year of French, German, or Italian; and 6 hours chosen from 2000level or higher art history, 2000-level or higher English, and 2000-level
or higher philosophy.
For musical arts/teacher education majors, 6 hours are required, including MUSL 2100 and 3 hours in art history, humanities, language, philosophy, or religious studies. (6 additional hours of humanities credit
are counted in the Music Literature/History category of the major area
requirements, above.)
For vocal performance majors, 9-13 hours: MUSL 2100 and 6-10 hours
(two semesters) chosen from French, German, and Italian.
HUMANITIES ELECTIVES
African American and Diaspora Studies: 1506 and all HCA-designated
courses
Anthropology: All HCA-designated courses
Arabic: All courses
Asian Studies: 2100W, 2511, 2512, 2601, 2602, 2611, 3606
Catalan: All courses
Chinese: All courses
Cinema and Media Arts: All courses except W courses
Classics: All, except SBS-designated courses
Comparative Literature: All courses
English: All courses
European Studies: All HCA-designated courses
French: All courses
German: All courses
Greek: All courses
Hebrew: All courses
History of Art: All courses (art studio courses excluded)
Humanities: All courses
Italian: All courses
Japanese: All courses
Jewish Studies: All HCA- and US-designated courses
Latin: All courses
Medicine, Health, and Society: All HCA-designated courses
Music Literature/History: 1610, 1111-02, 1111-03, (Music and Modernism; Shakespeare and Music), 1300, 3155
Philosophy: All courses except 3003 and 1003
Portuguese: All courses
Religious Studies or Divinity School: All courses
Russian: All courses
Spanish: All courses
Theatre: All courses offered for AXLE credit
Women’s and Gender Studies: All HCA- and US-designated courses,
2239, 2248

History, Social Science (3 hours)
For musical arts/teacher education majors, 6 hours History and Social
Science are required: 3 hours American History chosen from HIST
1390, 1400, 1410, 1420, 1440, 1660, 1690, 1730, 1740, 2580, 2590,
2610, 2620, 2630, 2640, 2650, 2690, 2700, 2710 and AP credit in
American History; and 3 hours in a social science discipline other than
history chosen from Anthropology, Economics, Political Science or
Sociology. (3 additional hours of history and social science credit are
counted in the Music Literature/History category of the major area
requirements, above.)
HISTORY
Classics: only SBS-designated courses
History: All courses
Music Literature/History: 1111-01 (Music and Global Health), 2600, 1110,
2110, 2150

B

252
SOCIAL SCIENCE
African American and Diaspora Studies: All courses except 1506 and
HCA-designated
Anthropology: All courses except HCA-designated
Asian Studies: 2630, 1680, 2560
Communication Studies: All AXLE courses except 1500 and 1850
Economics: All courses offered for AXLE credit
European Studies: All courses except HCA-designated
Human and Organizational Development (Peabody): All 3-hour courses
except 1115 and practica
Interdisciplinary Studies: 3001
Jewish Studies: All SBS-, INT-, and P-designated courses
Latin American Studies: All AXLE courses
Medicine, Health, and Society: All P-designated courses and 2510, 3120,
3350
Political Science: All courses
Psychology (A&S): All courses except MNS-designated
Psychology and Human Development (Peabody): All 3-hour courses
from 1205-3200 inclusive
Sociology: All courses
Women’s and Gender Studies: All courses except HCA- and
US-designated and 2239, 2248

Mathematics, Natural Science (3 hours)
Students who score below 550 on the SAT Math Section or below 22 on
ACT Math should take MATH 1010 or 1005. For musical arts/teacher
education majors, 6 or 7 hours, including statistics (MATH 1010 or
1011, or PSY-PC 2110 [Peabody]) or calculus (MATH 1100, 1200,
1201, 1300, 1301, 2200, 2300, 2500, 2501); and a science course
with a lab.
MATHEMATICS
Mathematics: All courses
Philosophy: 1003 and 3003
Psychology (Peabody): PSY-PC 2110
NATURAL SCIENCE
Astronomy: All MNS-designated courses, including accompanying labs
Biological Sciences: All AXLE courses, with corequisite labs
Chemistry: All AXLE courses, with corequisite labs
Earth and Environmental Sciences (Geology): All MNS-designated courses
Neuroscience: All MNS-designated courses
Physics: All MNS-designated courses, including accompanying labs
Psychology: All MNS-designated courses

Academic Electives (9 hours)
For composition majors, 2–6 hours, to complete 33 hours in liberal arts.
For musical arts/teacher education majors, 6 hours, specifically Education 1220 and Special Education 1210.
For vocal performance majors, 5-9 hours to total 30 hours in liberal arts.
Academic electives, drawn from courses earning 3 or more credits, may
include:
• Any course listed in the Liberal Arts Core
• Non-music courses in American studies, computer science, engineering science, financial economics, managerial studies, human and
organizational development
• Any course in the Divinity School
Practicums and internships may not count as academic electives.

Free electives (sufficient to complete 126 hours)
Any course in any Vanderbilt school.

Minor Area and Concentration Requirements
Concentrations and the minor in a second instrument are
open to bachelor of music degree students. Honors in Music
History and Literature is open to all undergraduates. Deadline

vanderbilt university

to declare a concentration or minor is the fifth day of the first
semester of the senior year.
CONCENTRATION IN COLLABORATIVE ARTS. 15–21 hours
Literature/History: MUSL 3220 or 3221
Performance: HRPS 1100 (1 hour), MUSO 4970 (1 hour), PIAN 1000
every semester
Other Music: MUSO 1400, 1410, 1420, MREP 3310 or 3311, 3330,
MUSO 3850 (2 hours in vocal coaching or chamber music literature)
Ensemble: One semester chosen from MUSE 1020, 2120, 1010, 1030,
or other approved conducted choir; one semester of 2300; one
semester of 1030 (as apprentice pianist); six semesters of 2320,
2330, 2210, 2310, or 2230; and three semesters ensemble of choice
with adviser’s approval.
Liberal Arts: Must include 3-5 hours each in two different languages
chosen from Italian, German, or French. Students with previous study
in one of these must study the other two.
Recommended: MUTH 3110 and MUSL 2330
CONCENTRATION IN COMPOSITION. 18 hours minimum
Department approval required for admission to this concentration.
Composition: COMP 1100; choice of two from MUTH 3130, 3110, 3210,
3200, 3120, 3140, 3160, 3170, 3220, or 3890
Composition (elective): 11 hours over a minimum of 4 semesters in
COMP 2100
CONCENTRATION IN JAZZ. 18 hours minimum
Department approval required for admission into the concentration.
Bachelor of Music students are eligible to audition for a faculty committeee no earlier than the end of their first year.
Literature/History: MUSL 1620
Composition/Theory: MUTH 3120; JAZZ 1150
Other Course Work: MUSO 1220; MUED 2140
Performance: JAZZ 1100 (minimum of 4 semesters/4 credit hours);
MUSO 4970 (in addition to recital required for major)
Ensemble: MUSE 1310, 1320, or 1330 (minimum of 2 semesters/
2 credit hours)
CONCENTRATION IN MUSIC LITERATURE/HISTORY. 21–25 hours
Literature/History: 9 elective hours (in addition to 9 hours required for the
musical arts major)
Liberal Arts: History 1350, 1360, 6-10 hours (two semesters) of foreign
language approved by the department; a total of 34 hours, rather
than 30, in liberal arts
CONCENTRATION IN PEDAGOGY. 15 or 16 hours
Music Cognition coursework: MUED 2160
Instrumental Literature: Choice of MREP 3310, 3311, 3300, 3330, or
MUSO 3850 (in field, 2 hours)
Pedagogy coursework: Choice of MPED 3110, 3100, 3130 or MUSO
3850 (in field, 2 hours), and Pedagogy Practicum MPED 3870 (2 hours)
Pedagogy Internship: MPED 3880 (6 hours)
Senior Recital: MUSO 4970
Liberal Arts: Must include PSY-PC 1250 and 2600 (Peabody courses)
CONCENTRATION IN THEORY. 19 hours
Departmental approval required for admission to this concentration.
Composition/Theory: COMP 1100 and 16 hours in MUTH 3210, 3200,
3100, 3120, 3140, 3150, 3160, 3220, or 3890
HONORS IN MUSIC LITERATURE AND HISTORY. 9 hours
Departmental approval required for admission to this program; see regulations in the Honors section of the catalog.
Thesis: Departmental approval of a formal thesis prospectus, MUSL
4998-4999 (6 hours), and successful completion of an oral defense.
Course work: One course beyond the MUSL core chosen from MUSL
3150, 3220-3240, 3160, 2610, or 3890 (3 hours)
The MUSL credit hours of this program may double-count in the concentration in music literature/history.

Blair School of Music / The Degree Program
MINOR INSTRUMENT. 10 hours
Ensemble: Participation on minor instrument (including voice) in two
separate ensembles in addition to major instrument requirement, as
assigned (2 hours)
Performance: Minimum of four semesters (8 hours) in a second performance area (any orchestral instrument, piano, organ, harpsichord,
guitar, saxophone, euphonium, voice, or baroque violin or viola) at a
level of proficiency required by the department. Consent of instructor
and department required. NOTE: Composition majors may satisfy the
primary major ensemble and performance instruction requirements
with courses also used to fulfill the minor instrument requirements.

Teacher Education
The Blair School and Peabody College offer a program for
students interested in teacher licensure. Students completing this
program earn the bachelor of music (B.Mus.) degree, majoring
in the musical arts/teacher education track for four years, and the
master of education (M.Ed.) degree in the fifth year to complete
professional education requirements. During the junior year,
application is made to Peabody College. The M.Ed. work requires
one calendar year, June–May. Students may elect to work toward
licensure in either instrumental/general or vocal/general music,
based on their interest and ability to perform at a level sufficient
for placement in the appropriate performing ensemble. The curriculum includes a strong music performance emphasis; a solid
foundation in music literature, theory, and the liberal arts; undergraduate and graduate courses in psychology and education;
and practica (practical experience) four of the five years of study,
with two student teaching opportunities in the spring semester
of the master’s degree work. Practica constitute a wide variety of
grade K-12 experiences, including public school, private school,
and Blair’s precollege programs such as Suzuki strings, Blair
Children’s Chorus program, and the Nashville Youth Orchestra
program. Students complete the same music core requirements
as any other B.Mus. candidate. The liberal arts core is adapted to
fulfill state licensure requirements. The music electives ordinarily associated with the musical arts curriculum are, for students
in the five-year program, devoted to prerequisites for the M.Ed.
degree and for the teaching license; thus, there are very few free
elective hours in this curriculum.
Junior Mid-Program Review [Screening I]
All students admitted to this program at matriculation must be
formally continued through a process called Junior Mid-Program
Review. Criteria for this review are listed below. Students not
approved can complete the general musical arts degree.
Faculty evaluation of a student’s qualifications for continuation in a teacher education program includes academic,
performance, and disposition factors such as the following:
1. Dependability (as evidenced by good attendance and
academic performance in classes and practica)
2. Professional and ethical behavior (honesty, acceptance of
responsibility, emotional maturity, etc.)
3. Attitude and interpersonal skills (including the ability to
work with children and with peers)
4. Academic competence

253

Specific Criteria
1. A minimum cumulative grade point average of 2.500.
2. Successful completion (C- or better) of EDUC 1220 and
SPED 1210
3. Successful completion (C- or better) of MUTH 2200,
MUSC 2200, MUSL 2200W and MUED 3870.
4. Successful completion (C- or better) of two additional
Vanderbilt courses which count towards the Liberal Arts Core.
5. Departmental interview

General Criteria
These criteria rest on the professional judgment of appropriate faculty members, who are polled following the student’s
application for Junior Mid-Program Review.
1. Endorsement by the appropriate faculty that the applicant
has demonstrated the academic and musical qualifications
expected of Vanderbilt teacher education candidates.
2. Endorsement by the appropriate faculty that the applicant has demonstrated the personal and character traits
expected of Vanderbilt teacher education candidates.

Procedure for Junior Mid-Program Review [Screening I]
Students apply for continuation in the teacher education
program [Screening I] through the Blair program director.
Applications must be submitted in the fall semester of the
junior year. Deadline for submitting applications for Junior
Mid-Program Review [Screening I] is 1 October. A departmental
interview is then held with each candidate to review the student's
academic progress and disposition criteria of dependability, professional and ethical behavior, attitude, and interpersonal skills.

B

254

vanderbilt university

Fifth Year Curriculum
SUMMER		
EDUC 6510
EDUC 6010
EDUC 6310
MUED 5000

Semester hours

Principles of ELL Education		
Psychological Foundations of Education		
Teaching in Secondary Schools		
Philosophical Foundations and Contemporary Issues in Music Education		

3
3
3
3

Social/Philosophical Aspects of Education		
Practicum in Music Education		
Independent Study in Music (may be taken in summer;
requires approval of Blair associate dean)		
Advanced Studies for the Wind Band Conductor
Methods and Materials in Teaching Music, Instrumental or Vocal/Choral		
Methods and Materials in General Music, PreK through 12		

3
1

FALL
EDUC 6300
EDUC 6320
EDUC 7960
or MUED 5100
MUED 5010/5020
MUED 5030

2
3
3

SPRING
EDUC 7974
EDUC 7975

Internship in Teaching: Music		
6
Internship Seminar: Music		
1
(A capstone project is also required)
											___
Total hours:

Admission to Student Teaching [Screening II]
Prospective student teachers must apply for admission to student teaching during the fall semester of the fifth year. Application materials are available online at peabody.vanderbilt.edu/
admin-offices/teacher-licensure/licensure_for_undergraduate_
students/screening.php. Deadline for submitting applications is
1 October. Student teaching requires at least two placements at
two different age levels in a fifteen-week semester.

General Criteria for Admission to Student Teaching
1. Completion of the B.Mus. degree.
2. Admission to the Master of Education program.
3. Successful completion of all courses prerequisite to student
teaching.
4. A minimum grade point average of 3.00.
5. Satisfactory performance in course work in areas in which
teacher licensure is sought.
6. Submission of a résumé and a letter to parents introducing
yourself and outlining your goals for the students you teach.
7. Endorsement by the appropriate faculty regarding academic, musical, and personal readiness to teach, including
dependability, professional and ethical behavior, attitude,
and interpersonal skills.

Application for Teacher Licensure and
University Recommendation for Licensure
All students completing the teacher education program at
Vanderbilt are strongly advised to apply for a license in Tennessee whether or not they plan to teach in this state. Normally
a Tennessee license is accepted in all other states and foreign
countries in which Vanderbilt students apply to teach. The student is responsible for applying for licensure through the Office

31

of Teacher Licensure located in 210 Peabody Administration
Building. Each state has its own set of application forms and
procedures for licensure; information is available in the Office
of Teacher Licensure.
To be licensed through Vanderbilt’s teacher education
program, a graduate must earn a positive licensure recommendation from the university. The university’s decision to
recommend a candidate is based upon the following:
1. Maintaining a 3.0 grade point average in the fifth year.
2. Achieving the state minimum score on all required parts of
the PRAXIS Examinations. A copy of the scores must be sent
to the Vanderbilt Office of Teacher Licensure (code R 1871).
3. Satisfactory completion of the Teacher Performance
Assessment (edTPA).
4. Receiving a positive recommendation from the student’s
department as a result of the student teaching experience
(Pass in student teaching does not guarantee a favorable
recommendation).
All Vanderbilt teacher education programs are approved by
the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education
(NCATE). The program for licensure to teach instrumental/
general or vocal/general music is approved by the National
Association of Schools of Music (NASM).

3+2 B.Mus./MBA Blair-to-Owen
Program
The five-year joint program between the Blair School of
Music and the Owen Graduate School of Management allows
a small cohort of particularly motivated students to overlap
their undergraduate coursework with work toward the MBA,
facilitating the earning of both the undergraduate and graduate degrees in five years (ten semesters). By combining three
and one-half years in Vanderbilt’s Blair School of Music with

Blair School of Music / The Degree Program

one and one-half years of study in the Owen School, students
may obtain both the bachelor of music and the master of
business administration in five years. The baccalaureate from
the Blair School is awarded at the end of the fourth year, and
the MBA from the Owen School after the fifth year. Students
interested in pursuing this program must be enrolled in the
musical arts major.
This program follows the model adopted by the College
of Arts and Science and the School of Engineering, in which
a student spends his or her undergraduate time to “pursue
intellectual curiosity and develop analytic and communication skills—without regard to subject matter,” completing all
of the requirements of an established undergraduate major.
Thus, students in this Blair-to-Owen program will continue
to fulfill all of the B.Mus. degree requirements in musical arts,
but choose course offerings (particularly in their academic
electives) that will facilitate a rapid completion of the MBA
requirements.
Required course work includes the normal Blair course
work for the musical arts major, plus Business of Music
(MENT 1120) and a graded internship (MENT 3880 or 3881),
for a minimum of 80 credit hours in music. The liberal arts
core will also follow the requirements for the major, but must
include the following specific requirements:
• Calculus (1 semester)
• Statistics, e.g., ECON 1500: Economic Statistics
• ECON 1010: Principles of Macroeconomics
• ECON 1020: Principles of Microeconomics
• ECON 3010: Intermediate Microeconomic Theory
A curriculum plan, including recommended electives, is
provided in the Blair Student Handbook.
Students must apply to the Owen School for admission to
the five-year program during their junior year. Applications
are due no later than October 1 of the junior year, and early
application and GMAT are recommended. Acceptance into
the five-year program is extremely competitive and requires
advanced standing earned in undergraduate courses. Being
deficient in full-time work experience, the 3+2 student must
enhance his or her portfolio with outstanding academic
performance and show a strong commitment to a rigorous
business education. The Summer Business Institute (Accelerator) is strongly recommended for 3+2 applicants prior to
matriculating at Owen. The successful applicant will bring an
accomplished academic record (normally a GPA of 3.3 or better), satisfactory internship or work experience, an ability to
articulate his or her own preparedness for the work environment, and a strong endorsement from Vanderbilt faculty.
Students who are accepted to the 3+2 program will remain
registered as B.Mus. students through spring of junior year
and fall of senior year, and will register as Owen students
in spring of senior year. Academically, students will take a
full load of business courses both in fall and spring of senior
year while completing the final B.Mus. degree requirements
(normally, lessons and ensembles) in the musical arts major.
The completion of the B.Mus. degree requirements prior to fall
of the student’s fifth year is required for continuation in the
MBA program.
Tuition and Financial Aid
The scholarship or other financial aid commitment of the
Blair School will not be continued automatically beyond the
seventh semester for students enrolled in the joint program.

255

Eighth-semester financial aid is the student’s responsibility.
Students should notify the Owen School with their application if they are interested in being a candidate for an Owen
scholarship during their MBA studies. Early application is
recommended. Need-based aid will still apply.
Students pay tuition to the undergraduate school for the
fall semester of their fourth year, after which all tuition is paid
to Owen (and reflects graduate school tuition rates). The Blair
School of Music will waive fees for the required performance
instruction during spring of the fourth year to facilitate
completion of the B.Mus. requirements.

B

256

vanderbilt university

Special Programs

B

LAIR School of Music offers individual, group, class,
and ensemble instruction to precollege and adult
students (defined as students above high school age
not receiving university credit). A catalog describing these
programs is available at blair.vanderbilt.edu.

The Adult Program
Blair offers to adults individual instruction in orchestral instruments, piano, organ, guitar, harp, saxophone, euphonium,
fiddle, banjo, mandolin, dulcimer, steel drum/pan, voice, and
composition. Jazz voice, guitar, drumset, saxophone, and
piano are also available. Group instruction is available in guitar,
percussion, and steel drum.
Classes are offered in music theory, music literature and
history, music business, songwriting, and Alexander Technique.
Ensembles open to adults include the Vanderbilt Community
Chorus, steel drum ensemble, African Performing Ensemble
(Sankofa), fiddle ensemble, and the collegiate chamber music
offerings.
The Precollege Program
Blair offers individual instruction in orchestral instruments and
in piano, organ, guitar, harp, saxophone, euphonium, fiddle,
banjo, mandolin, dulcimer, steel drum/pan, and voice. Jazz
voice, guitar, drumset, saxophone, and piano are also available.
Group instruction is available in piano, fiddle, and (for young
children) Kindermusik for ages birth to five years. Instruction
using the Suzuki method is offered in violin and cello.
Class instruction includes music theory, music literature/
history, musicianship, and Alexander Technique.
Ensemble training is offered through the Nashville Youth
Orchestra program, the Blair Children’s Chorus program, Violin Performing Ensemble, Cello Choir, and chamber music.
The Blair School Certificate Program provides a curriculum
integrating advanced levels of performance study with training in music theory and history, chamber music (Certificate
of Distinction), performance classes, and recitals. Students
who successfully complete the requirements for this program
present a solo recital during their high school senior year and
receive either the Certificate of Distinction or the Certificate of
Merit upon graduation. Honors may be earned with additional
study in music theory and history. A variety of merit and
need-based scholarships, for which students may audition, are
awarded each year to outstanding precollege students by the
school and by several donors. Students in area high schools
may earn out-of-school credit towards high school graduation
for individual study of music at Blair or through participation
in the Nashville Youth Orchestra program or Blair Children's
Chorus program.
The Blair Concert Series
The Blair Concert Series offers solo, chamber, and orchestral music performances to the university community and
the region through the faculty Signature Series, the BMI
Composer-in-Residence Series, and the Music on Film Series.
National and international artists and ensembles, the Blair
faculty, including resident ensembles and soloists, and student
ensembles and performers are all featured. Weekly student

recitals are open to the public, as are all other student recitals.
More than 300 concerts are presented at the school each year,
and most are free of charge, as a gift to the community.
“The Blair Commissions: Music for the 21st Century,” a
project funded by the James Stephen Turner Family Charitable Foundation, presented three major world premieres by
some of the world’s most celebrated composers in the 2009–12
concert seasons. The first premiere, A Year in the Catskills
by Peter Schickele, was performed in Ingram Hall on March
16, 2009, by the Blair Woodwind Quintet. In spring 2010, the
Blakemore Trio premiered a work by composer/soprano
Susan Botti in Nashville and at Merkin Hall in New York City.
Images from a Closed Ward, composed by Michael Hersch for
the Blair String Quartet, was premiered in Nashville and New
York City in spring 2012. The project serves two intertwined
missions: to promote the composition of outstanding works
by the world’s leading composers and to invite attention to
the excellent ensembles and faculty performers of Vanderbilt
University.
The BMI Composer-in-Residence program, sponsored by
Broadcast Music Inc., brings visiting composers to campus
every year. The three-day residency includes lectures, performances of the composer’s works, and opportunities for interaction with students. Composers-in-residence have included
Robert Beaser, George Crumb, Michael Daugherty, Lukas Foss,
John Harbison, Karel Husa, Steven Mackey, Donald Martino,
Cindy McTee, Kevin Puts, Christopher Rouse, Adam Schoenberg, Joseph Schwantner, Frank Ticheli, Michael Torke, and
Joan Tower.

Blair School of Music / Academic Regulations

257

Academic Regulations
Honor System
All academic work at Vanderbilt is done under the Honor
System (see the chapter on Life at Vanderbilt.)
Faculty Advisers
All entering students are assigned academic advisers who assist
in the planning of programs and course schedules. Students
are required to meet with their advisers prior to registration
for each semester.
Class Attendance
Students are expected to attend all sessions of each class in
which they are enrolled. Attendance is usually a factor in
determining the final grade in a course. A student who fails to
abide by the attendance policy set by the course instructor is
subject to removal from the course.
The last day before and the first day after official holidays
are considered to be the same as any other day on which
classes are scheduled. Assignments are made for classes scheduled on these days, and tests may be given in them. Students
should take this fact into account in making travel plans.
Classroom Recording Policy
The use of technologies for audio and video recording of
lectures and other classroom activities is allowed only with the
express permission of the instructor. In cases where recordings are allowed, such content is restricted to personal use
only, unless permission is expressly granted in writing by the
instructor and by other classroom participants, including
other students. Personal use is defined as use by an individual
student for the purpose of studying or completing course
assignments. When students have permission for personal use
of recordings, they must still obtain written permission from
the instructor to share recordings with others.
For students registered with EAD and who have been
approved for audio and/or video recording of lectures and
other classroom activities as a reasonable accommodation,
applicable federal law requires instructors to permit those
recordings. Such recordings are also limited to personal use,
except with permission of the instructor and other students in
the class.
Credit Hour Definition
Credit hours are semester hours; e.g., a three-hour course carries
credit of three semester hours. One semester credit hour represents at least three hours of academic work per week, on average,
for one semester. Academic work includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, lectures, laboratory work, homework, research, class
readings, independent study, internships, practica, studio work,
recitals, practicing, rehearsing, and recitations. Some Vanderbilt
courses may have requirements which exceed this definition.
Certain courses (e.g., dissertation research, ensemble, performance instruction, and independent study) are designated as
repeatable as they contain evolving or iteratively new content.
These courses may be taken multiple times for credit. If a course
can be repeated, the number of credits allowable per semester
will be included in the course description.

Course Load
Tuition is charged on the basis of a normal course load of 12 to
18 semester hours. Course loads outside the norm, which must
be recommended by the student’s adviser and approved by the
associate dean, are charged at an hourly tuition rate. Students
permitted to take fewer than 12 hours are placed on probation,
unless their light load is necessary because of outside employment or illness. The maximum course load for the summer
session is 12 hours (6 hours for a summer half-session). A
student must be enrolled in a minimum of 12 hours to be classified as a full-time student.
Residence Requirement
A minimum of four semesters and at least 63 credit hours, as
well as the last two semesters and the last 30 credit hours, must
be spent in residence in the Blair School. Students transferring
from other schools of the university must spend the last two
semesters and at least the last 30 credit hours in residence in the
Blair School. Students who wish to study abroad or study away
in their penultimate semester may petition the Blair Curriculum
Committee for a waiver of the residence requirement.
Advanced Placement
Advanced Placement with Credit. Advanced placement
with credit is granted in a number of areas (see the chapter on
Admission).
Advanced Placement without Credit. Students may be admitted to advanced music courses on the basis of placement tests
at Blair, but no credit is awarded for music courses exempted.
Transfer Credit
Transfer courses are often taken as free electives, but they
may also earn liberal arts core credit. They may not fulfill the
music core requirements, count as part of the last 30 hours of
residence, serve as repeat credit, or be taken on a Pass/Fail basis.
Work transferred from another institution will not carry with
it a grade point average. No course in which a grade below C–
was received will be credited toward the B.Mus. degree.
Pre-freshman work. Credit for pre-freshman college work
may be given, subject to evaluation by the Office of Academic
Services and approval of the associate dean. Credit for courses
taken at another institution during the summer preceding a
student’s initial enrollment at Vanderbilt will be granted only
if approval is obtained in advance from the associate dean.
The course work must be comparable to courses offered at
Vanderbilt. Credit will be awarded only if the course is regularly offered by an accredited two-year or four-year college or
university, if the teacher was a regular faculty member of that
institution, and if a majority of the students in the course were
candidates for a degree at that institution.
Summer studies. Students enrolled at Blair may receive
transfer credit for summer courses taken at another four-year,
fully accredited institution. This may include work at festivals
or camps, if offered through an accredited institution. To
qualify for summer credit, a student must be in good standing, consult the Office of Academic Services, provide course
descriptions, and obtain authorization in advance. Deadline
for pre-approval is April 1.

B

258

Semester work at another institution. Students wanting
to receive transfer credit for a semester of work at another
institution must receive approval in advance from the associate
dean. To qualify for such credit, the student must be in good
standing and must present a plan that makes clear the educational rationale for such work, the ways in which it supplements
the Vanderbilt curriculum, and the equivalence of standards
to those at Vanderbilt. Approval of the overall plan must be
followed by approval of specific courses by the associate dean,
the appropriate academic department, and the registrar’s office.
Students enrolled full time (i.e., carrying at least 12 credit hours)
during a regular (fall or spring) semester are assumed to be
engaged in full-time study at Vanderbilt. Such students are not
permitted to take additional course work elsewhere, for transfer
credit, during the semester. This includes online courses as well
as courses offered by nearby institutions.
Transfer Students
Transfer applicants must comply with university standards
(see the chapter on Admissions). The required audition is of
major importance in the evaluation of any application. Composition applicants must submit a composition portfolio and
interview with a member of the composition faculty.
Transfer students must submit catalog copy and, in most
cases, course syllabi from the previous institution(s). A level of
performance study is assigned based on the entrance audition.
Credit for courses is subject to evaluation. Music courses may
require an examination to verify placement and/or credit at
Vanderbilt, and credit for non-music courses must be approved
by the appropriate Vanderbilt department. Transfer students
must complete at least half the credit required for the degree,
or 63 hours, at the Blair School. See also, Transfer courses.
Intra-university transfer. Students intending to transfer
within the university should meet with the head of academic
advising and file appropriate paperwork. For students
transferring out of the B.Mus. program, music fees are covered
through the end of the final term as a B.Mus. student. All
students are expected to maintain a minimum of 3 credit
hours within their home school until transfer is approved.
First semester freshmen are ineligible for transfer status. Students who transferred to Vanderbilt University from another
institution are eligible for intra-university transfer after having
completed one semester in residence and having achieved
sophomore standing. See also, the chapter on Admissions.
Study Abroad
Five Vanderbilt study abroad programs are coordinated with the
degree programs in music: the IES programs in Vienna, Austria,
and in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, the Milhaud Conservatory
through Vanderbilt in France, the DIS program at the Royal
Danish Academy of Music in Copenhagen, Denmark, and the
IFSA/Butler program at the University of Sydney and Sydney
Conservatorium of Music in Sydney, Australia. These programs
include provisions for lesson and ensemble credits, contingent
upon audition and admission to the program. These will count
towards the Blair music core and are covered at least in part by
regular tuition and fees, although students are responsible for
any instrument rental fees they accrue. All programs also allow
for a range of liberal arts and elective credits. Students enrolled
in IES Vienna will be required to enroll in German; there is,
however, no language prerequisite for admission to the program. Further information can be obtained from the Vanderbilt
Global Education Office and from Blair’s associate dean.

vanderbilt university

Blair students may also elect any of the Vanderbilt-approved
study abroad programs; see descriptions under “Study Abroad”
in the front chapters of the catalog. Blair students in these
programs have typically enrolled in music electives, courses in
the liberal arts core, and course work toward minors and second
majors. Students in these programs typically arrange alternative private lesson study, and those fees are usually not covered
by tuition. It is also possible to pursue study abroad through
transfer credit; the associate dean’s office has more details. It
should be noted, however, that if a program has been approved
for direct credit by Vanderbilt, it must be taken as the approved
direct-credit program by matriculated Vanderbilt students. In
no case, after matriculating at Vanderbilt, may a student apply
to participate in an approved direct-credit program for transfer
credit through a different university, or through an external
agency, and then seek to transfer that credit into Vanderbilt. Any
student studying abroad must register for International SOS.
Registration
Registration is available to entering first-year students in June.
Continuing students register on dates specified each semester
in the University Calendar and as assigned in “YES” (Your
Enrollment Services, yes.vanderbilt.edu). Conferences with
faculty advisers are required before students may register.
Detailed information on registration is available on the University Registrar website, registrar.vanderbilt.edu/registration/
registration-information/.
Prior to registration, students should refer to the sample
curriculum plans in the Blair Student Handbook. Records and
the degree audit should be checked regarding progress toward
completing the following:
1. Music core
2. Liberal arts core
3. Additional major area requirements
A student whose registration choices are denied or altered
(full or cancelled class, lack of prerequisite courses, etc.) may
select alternate courses during the Open Enrollment registration period.
Change of Course
Course changes may be made during the Open Enrollment
period or the official Change Period (Drop/Add) as published
in the University Calendar. All changes need the adviser’s
approval. A course dropped during the Change Period does
not show on a transcript.
A course may be dropped or changed from P/F to graded
status prior to the deadline for withdrawal published in the
University Calendar. The approval of the adviser and associate
dean is required (see Grading System regarding withdrawal
grades). Regularly enrolled students must maintain a minimum
course load of 12 hours.
Grading System
A:		
B:		
C:		
D:		
F:		

excellent
good
satisfactory
minimum pass work
failure

Under certain circumstances the following grades may be awarded (see
explanations below):
Pass:
W:

D– or above
withdrawal

Blair School of Music / Academic Regulations
M:
I:		

missed final examination (prior approval needed; see below)
incomplete in some requirement other than final examination 		
(see below)
missed final examination and incomplete in some other
requirement

MI:

Plus and minus modifiers may be associated with letter
grades A through D as shown in the table below. Grade point
averages are calculated using indicated grade point values.
Defined Grades with Corresponding Grade Points
Per Credit Hour
A
A–
B+
B
B–
C+

=
=
=
=
=
=

4.0
3.7
3.3
3.0
2.7
2.3

C
C–
D+
D
D–
F

=
=
=
=
=
=

2.0
1.7
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.0

Grade Point Average
A student’s grade point average is obtained by dividing the
total grade points earned by the number of hours for which
the student registered, excluding courses audited or taken for
no credit, those from which the student has withdrawn or for
which an incomplete grade (I, M, or MI) has been authorized,
and those with the grade Pass.

Pass/Fail Option (Elective)
Students may elect to take a limited number of courses on
a Pass/Fail (P/F) basis. To enroll for a course on a Pass/Fail
basis, students must have completed at least two semesters at
Vanderbilt, must have achieved at least sophomore standing,
and must not be on academic probation. The Blair Office of
Academic Services can assist with P/F registration.
For B.Mus. students, the Pass/Fail option is limited to courses
taken as free electives. Course work in the area of a minor or
second major is governed by the school in which the department
or program is housed. No more than one course may be elected
on a Pass/Fail basis in any one semester. Only a total of 18 hours
towards the 126-hour degree total may be taken on a Pass/Fail
basis. Students electing course work on a Pass/Fail basis must
be enrolled for 12 graded hours. A graduating senior who has
permission to take fewer than 12 hours on a graded basis may
take one course on a P/F basis in addition to the courses required
for graduation. If the student does not graduate at the end of that
semester, the grade P is automatically converted to the grade
actually earned.
Students may register for grading on a Pass/Fail basis until
the close of the Change Period. Students may change from
Pass/Fail to graded status until the deadline date for dropping
a course that is published in the University Calendar.
Those electing the Pass/Fail option must meet all course
requirements (e.g., reports, papers, examinations, attendance,
etc.) and are graded in the normal way. Instructors are not
informed of the names of students enrolled on a Pass/Fail
basis. At the end of the semester, a regular grade is submitted
for the student enrolled under the P/F option. Any grade of
D- or above is converted in the Student Records System to a
P, while an F will be recorded if a student enrolled under this
option fails the course. The P grade is not counted in the grade
point average nor used in the determination of honors. The
grade of F earned under the Pass/Fail option is included in the
calculation of the grade point average.

259

Deficiency Notices
During the week after mid-semester, the University Registrar
posts deficiency notices for students whose mid-semester grade
in any course is a C– or below or whose work is incomplete (I).
(Deficiency notices are found in the Access to Academic Information application in YES at yes.vanderbilt.edu.) Deficiencies are
issued as a matter of information and warning. Deficiencies do
not show on transcripts, but information is sent to the faculty
advisers and may be sent to parents of those students who are
dependents of their parents or who have authorized such reports.
A student who receives a deficiency notice is required to meet
with the faculty adviser before the deadline for withdrawal at
the end of the week. A student with deficiencies in two or more
courses or any senior who receives a deficiency notice is also
required to meet with the associate dean before the deadline for
withdrawal (usually Friday of the week after mid-semester).

W: Withdrawal
A student may withdraw from a course after the official
Change Period and prior to the deadline for withdrawal published in the University Calendar, generally Friday of the week
after mid-semester. A course enrollment form must be signed
by the instructor, adviser, and associate dean and filed with
the registrar. (Students from other schools of the university
must file with their home school.) Withdrawals after the published deadline result in an F. The grade W may be assigned
by the associate dean to a student who seeks to withdraw from
a course or from school after the deadline for reasons such as
extended illness or unusual personal or family problems. No
W grades are calculated in a student’s grade point average.
Temporary Grades
Temporary grades are placeholders that are assigned under
defined circumstances with a specified deadline by which
they will be replaced with a permanent grade. A student who
receives a temporary grade is ineligible for the Dean’s List.
Students cannot graduate with any temporary grades.

I: Incomplete
An Incomplete is given only under extenuating circumstances
and only when a significant body of satisfactory work has been
completed in a course. The I is not intended as a replacement
for a failing grade, nor should it be given to a student who
misses the final examination. The M grade is used for the latter
purpose. The request for an Incomplete is generally initiated
by the student and must be approved by the instructor. The
instructor may initiate the assignment of an Incomplete if
warranted by the circumstances and conditions referenced
above. In either case, in assigning the grade of I, the instructor
specifies (a) a default grade that counts the missing work as
zero and (b) a deadline by which the missing work must be
submitted. That deadline must be no later than the last class
day of the next regular semester in residence. The Incomplete
can be extended beyond the next semester only if the student’s
associate dean determines that an extension is warranted. If
the required work is submitted by the deadline for removing
the Incomplete, the I will be replaced by the grade earned. If
the work is not completed by the deadline, the default grade
will become the permanent grade for the course.
The Incomplete is not calculated in the GPA, but a student
who receives an Incomplete is ineligible for the Dean’s List.

B

260

M: Missing a Final Examination
The grade M is given to a student who misses the final
examination and is not known to have defaulted, provided the
student could have passed the course had the final examination been successfully completed. The grade of F is given
if the student could not pass the course even with the final
examination.
It is the student’s responsibility to contact the Dean’s Office
before the first class day of the next regular semester, regardless of whether the student will be in residence that semester,
to request permission to take a makeup examination. The
makeup examination must be taken on or before the tenth
class day of the next regular semester. If the request has not
been submitted by the proper time, or if the student fails to
take the makeup examination within the prescribed time, the
M grade will be replaced by a default grade submitted by the
instructor when the M is assigned.

MI: Missing a Final Examination and Other Work
The grade MI is assigned to a student who misses the final
examination and whose work is incomplete in other respects.
The MI may not be turned in without prior authorization by the
associate dean. It is the student’s responsibility to contact the
Dean’s Office to request permission to take a makeup examination and to arrange for submission of the missing work.
No-Credit Courses (NC)
Students who wish to take courses on a no-credit basis must
file with the Blair Office of Academic Services before the end
of the Change Period. Students must attend class and complete all course work. A grade is recorded on the transcript
with the notation NC, indicating that it does not count toward
the degree.
No-credit courses count in the computation of a student’s
academic load and tuition, but not in the computation of the
grade point average.
Auditing
Regularly enrolled Blair students who want to audit courses in
any of the undergraduate schools of the university must obtain
the written consent of the instructor to attend the class but do
not register for the course for credit. Forms are available from
the Blair Office of Academic Services. No permanent record
is kept of the audit. Regular students may audit one class each
semester.
Repeated Courses
Certain courses, notably performing ensembles and variable
credit performance instruction, may be taken more than
once for credit. Otherwise, students may repeat any course to
replace a grade, with no additional credit hours earned, subject
to the following conditions:
Courses taken at Vanderbilt may not be repeated elsewhere.
A grade may not be replaced by a grade of “Pass.”
A grade of W or I cannot replace a letter grade.
Only the most recent grade is calculated in the grade point
average, but all grades show on the transcript.
Dead Week
The last week of classes, i.e., the last seven calendar days before
the final examination period each semester, is designated as

vanderbilt university

dead week. No examinations of any type, including quizzes,
portions of final examinations, recitals, or ensemble performances, may be given during this time without the express
written permission of the dean and notification of students
at least two weeks before dead week. Violations should be
reported to the dean.
Examinations
All examinations are conducted under the honor system. Primary and alternate exam schedules, which allow two hours for
a final exam in each course, are listed on the University Registrar's website. The instructor may use the alternate schedule in
addition to, but not instead of, the primary schedule.
Alternatives to standard in-class final examinations, such
as term papers or take-home, self-scheduled, or oral examinations may be given at the instructor’s discretion. A take-home
exam is distributed at the last regular class meeting and
must be completed by the latest time scheduled for the final
examination.
Performance examinations are scheduled by department
chairs. Students giving full recitals during the semester may be
exempted from performance examinations at the discretion
of the instructor. If performance examinations are scheduled
on a reading day (the day after classes end, when no course
examinations are scheduled), students are also given the
choice of a different day for their performance examinations.
A student who misses a final examination may be eligible to
receive the grade M (see Temporary Grades).
Writing Portfolio
Students in their senior year are required to submit a writing
portfolio drawn from academic course work from one or more
classes to be evaluated by a faculty committee. Emphasis should
be placed on demonstrating an ability to write clearly and
effectively and on the student’s ability to form connections
across two or more disciplines. Students are required to prepare
a one-paragraph narrative explaining how the submitted work
demonstrates the required competencies.
Grade Reports
Grade reports and faculty critiques of performance examinations
will be provided to students as soon as possible at the end of each
semester. Grades are available online in the Academic Record,
which is housed within YES (Your Enrollment Services) at
yes.vanderbilt.edu. Occasionally, student academic information
may be shared with appropriate faculty committees for purposes
of promotion and tenure review.
A grade reported and recorded in the Office of the University
Registrar may be changed only upon written request of the
instructor, on certification that the original report was in error,
with approval of the associate dean.
Academic Standards
For the purposes of class standing, a regular semester is defined
as any fall or spring term in which a student is registered for at
least 12 hours.

Class Standing
To qualify for sophomore standing, a student must complete
a minimum of 24 hours with a grade point average of 1.8 and
have completed two regular semesters.

Blair School of Music / Academic Regulations

To qualify for junior standing, a student must complete a
minimum of 54 hours with a grade point average of 1.9, must
complete MUTH 2200 and MUSC 2200, and must have
completed four regular semesters.
To qualify for senior standing, a student must complete a
minimum of 86 hours with a grade point average of 2.0 and
have completed six regular semesters.

Academic Probation
Students are placed on probation if they fail to meet class
standing benchmarks, as noted above. Students on probation
must qualify for class standing in one additional semester or
risk being dropped from the university.
Students are placed on academic probation: if they fail to
meet class standing benchmarks; if they complete fewer than
12 hours in a fall or spring semester except in cases involving documented mitigating circumstances (illness, injury, or
family emergency); or if their semester grade point averages
fall below 1.8 overall or 2.0 in music. In addition, freshmen
are placed on academic probation if they do not complete one
writing course. Incomplete grades may adversely affect class
standing or grade point averages.
Students on academic probation may not transfer summer
study credit, elect to take courses on a Pass/Fail basis, earn
credit by departmental examination, or participate in any
extracurricular performance activity. They are required to
participate in a special academic advising program. Students
will be placed on probation no more than twice. Students who
are candidates for probation a third time will be dropped from
the university.

Sudden Academic Insufficiency
Any student who fails by a wide margin to reach prescribed
levels of academic achievement, either at the end of a semester
or at mid-semester, is reviewed by the associate dean’s office
in conjunction with the academic and studio adviser(s). If
the student is not making satisfactory progress towards the
degree, the student may be placed on probation or may be
advised or required to take a leave of absence or advised to
withdraw from the university. Appeals of such findings should
be addressed to the Blair Curriculum Committee.

Scholarship Student Requirements
Students receiving honor scholarships through Blair School
of Music must be enrolled full time, taking all assigned music
courses, must qualify for class standing, and must maintain
each semester minimum grade point averages of 2.0 overall
and 2.7 in music. Students receiving the Cornelius Vanderbilt
Honor Scholarship must maintain a minimum 3.0 grade point
average overall and 3.0 in music each year. Additional requirements may be stipulated in scholarship award letters.
Honor scholarship awards are considered for renewal
annually. Student work will be reviewed at the end of spring
semester for possible renewal for the following academic year.
Incomplete grades may adversely affect renewal. A student
who falls short of the requirements will normally have the
scholarship for one semester of grace, after which, if requirements are still not met, the scholarship will be lost.
Students receiving scholarships or grants as part of their
financial aid packages (not honor scholarships) must qualify
for class standing in order to be considered for renewal each

261

year. Students receiving federal aid are expected to make
satisfactory academic progress as outlined in the chapter on
Financial Information.
Graduation Requirements
Candidates for degrees must have completed 126 hours and all
curriculum requirements, have passed all prescribed examinations, and be free of indebtedness to the university.
Exceptions to stated degree requirements and procedures
must be approved by the Curriculum Committee as the
representative body of the faculty in matters pertaining to the
curriculum.
The minimum grade point averages required for graduation are 2.0 overall and 2.0 in music. A student taking a second
major must earn a 2.0 in that major in order for it to be certified on the transcript.
If requirements for graduation change, students may elect
to be bound by requirements published in the Undergraduate
Catalog in either their entering or their graduating year.
Degree Audit Reports
An online degree audit is available on YES to all Blair students,
showing total hours earned, degree requirements completed,
and those still to be met. Students should examine the audit
carefully with their faculty advisers. Problems or suspected
errors should be discussed immediately with the Blair Office
of Academic Services.
Credit by Departmental Examination
In certain circumstances, students may be awarded course
credit (a maximum of 8 hours) by departmental examination.
This procedure is distinct from the awarding of credit through
the College Board Advanced Placement Tests or the International Baccalaureate. Students apply for credit by examination
through the Blair Office of Academic Services.
To earn credit by departmental examination, students
must be enrolled for at least 12 hours, be in good standing, be
recommended by their advisers, and have the approval of the
appropriate department. In addition, students must seek prior
approval of their study plan through the associate dean’s office.
Students may attempt to earn credit by examination in no more
than two courses in one semester, only once in any course in
one semester, and no more than twice in the same course.
Credit hours and grade are awarded on the basis of the
grade earned on the examination, subject to the policy of
the department awarding credit. Students have the option of
refusing to accept the credit hours and grade after learning the
results of the examination.
Students enrolled for at least 12 hours are not charged extra
tuition for hours earned through credit by examination, so
long as the amount of credit falls within the allowable limits
of an 18-hour tuition load, including no-credit courses and
courses dropped after the change period. Students in this category must pay a $50 fee for the cost of constructing, administering, and grading the examination. Since this cost has
already been incurred, students who refuse the credit hours
and grade are charged the $50 fee nevertheless. Full-time
students with a tuition load exceeding 18 hours and students
taking fewer than 12 hours pay tuition at the regular rate, per
credit hour, with no additional fee.

B

262

Senior Re-examination
A candidate for graduation who fails not more than one course
in the final semester may be allowed one re-examination,
provided the course failed would prevent the student’s graduation, and provided the student could pass the course by passing a re-examination. Certain courses may be excluded from
re-examination. The re-examination must be requested through
the student’s associate dean’s office, and, if approved, it is
given immediately after the close of the last semester of the
student’s senior year. A student who passes the re-examination
will receive a D- in the course. The terms and administration
of senior re-examination are the responsibility of the school
that offers the course. Note: For engineering students taking
engineering courses, the senior re-examination policy applies if
a student fails not more than one course in the senior year.
Independent Study
Students must obtain permission to enroll in Independent
Study from the instructor of their choice prior to registration.
Independent Study authorization forms are available at blair.
vanderbilt.edu/academics. The instructor’s signature on the
authorization form indicates a willingness to supervise the
Independent Study project. A contract or study plan, approved
by the instructor in consultation with the appropriate department chair and the associate dean, must be submitted to the
Blair Office of Academic Services by the tenth calendar day
after classes begin. If no plan is submitted, the student will
be dropped from Independent Study. An Independent Study
project should result in a substantial written report, paper, or
lecture/recital. The report, recording, or some physical manifestation of the project should be retained by the instructor. Independent Study projects proposed by students for cross-school
registration must be approved through the mechanisms of both
schools. Consult associate deans from both schools for guidance.
A student may register for a maximum of 3 hours in
Independent Study in a semester. A student may count a total
of 6 hours in Independent Study toward the degree. A faculty
member may supervise no more than four students per semester in Independent Study projects.
Independent Study cannot substitute for courses which are
part of the curriculum.
Internships
The Career Center assists students interested in internship
opportunities in the music industry and elsewhere; there are
opportunities in many states of the U.S. and also abroad, both
during the academic year and in the summer. A student serving
as an intern may register for MENT 3880, 3881, or 3882 as a corollary if credit is desired. Students with summer internships that
require an academic component must register for credit. (http://
vanderbilt.edu/career/students/internships.php#academicCredit) A
maximum of 6 hours of internship credit may be counted toward
the degree. Students are responsible for finding a faculty sponsor;
a written study plan must be approved by the faculty sponsor
and the Blair associate dean no later than the tenth day of classes.
Internship paperwork is available on the Blair School website at
blair.vanderbilt.edu/academics.
Performance Instruction: B.Mus. Degree
Fees. Performance instruction fees are waived for B.Mus.
students. A one-time music technology fee is charged to each
first-year student.

vanderbilt university

Elective credit. B.Mus. students taking a second instrument
normally enroll in 1100-level performance instruction for 1 or
2 hours elective credit. Consent of the instructor is required.
B.Mus. majors who have declared a minor instrument also
register for performance instruction at the 1100 level; consent
of the instructor and notification of the Blair Office of Academic Services are required.
Composition Majors. Students register for performance
instruction at the 1100 level. A minimum of 6 semesters of
study totaling 6 credit hours is required.
Musical Arts Majors and Musical Arts/Teacher Education
Majors. First-year students and sophomores register for 2100level performance instruction in their primary area. Juniors
and seniors register for 4100-level performance instruction
in their primary area. A minimum of 8 semesters totaling 16
credit hours required; performance instruction required every
semester in residence.
Performance Majors. First-year students and sophomores
register for 2200-level performance instruction in their primary area. Juniors and seniors register for 4200-level instruction in their primary area. A minimum of 8 semesters totaling
32 hours (instrumental performance majors) or 28 hours
(vocal performance majors) required; performance instruction
required every semester in residence.

Upper Divisional Hearing (Performance Majors Only)
Requirements for performance majors include an upper
divisional hearing in the sophomore year to determine continuance in the performance degree program and permit subsequent
enrollment in upper division study at the 4200 level. Students
are required to perform a program of twenty to thirty minutes
for a faculty committee convened by the studio instructor or by
the department chair. The committee will normally consist of
the student’s studio teacher and at least two additional members
of the department. Memorization is required as appropriate,
and accompaniment is expected where called for.
The student must consult with the studio instructor regarding appropriate repertoire. Instrumental selections must be
chosen from the solo repertoire and should represent diverse
historical periods. Percussionists must perform on keyboard
percussion, timpani, and snare drum and/or multiple percussion. String repertoire must include solo Bach. Pianists must
perform a 30-minute memorized program of solo piano literature representing at least three style periods. Vocal repertoire
must include a minimum of five songs of contrasting periods
and styles, using three languages (Italian, English, and either
French or German).
Failure to pass this hearing demonstrates a lack of the requisite skills to graduate in performance at Blair, necessitating transfer to another degree program. A student may petition the faculty
once for a second hearing, with entirely different repertoire, to
take place before the end of the first semester of the junior year.
Solo Recitals

Pre-Recital Hearing
All students (excepting composition) giving required recitals
and any student who wishes to give a recital in the Blair building must pass a hearing, held at least three weeks before the
recital. After establishing a recital date, the student, with guidance from the studio instructor, will assemble a recital hearing
committee, consisting of two additional faculty members, one

Blair School of Music / Academic Regulations

of whom must be from outside the student’s performing area.
For musical arts/teacher education students, the committee will
normally consist of the studio instructor, a teacher education
faculty member, and at least one additional faculty member.
For non-required, non-credit recitals, the hearing committee
may be from within the department. For any recital involving
a student’s second performing medium, the student must seek
approval from the studio instructor and department chair of
the secondary and primary performing areas; in addition, a fulltime faculty member from the secondary performing area must
be part of the hearing committee. The student must notify the
recital hearing committee, in writing, of the hearing date, recital
date, time, and place. Senior composition recitals are screened
in advance at the department level.
For a required junior or senior recital, the repertoire will
normally encompass three major style periods, as appropriate
to the medium; normally, at least one work in a contemporary
idiom will be included in either the junior or senior recital. A
required senior recital must also include written or spoken
program notes, visual media, or other audience engagement
component, with the approval of the studio instructor. The
hearing committee should hear all of the recital repertoire.
Grading of the hearing is on a Pass/Fail basis, with written
faculty comments. If a student fails the hearing, another must
be scheduled. Only two recital hearings in one semester are
permitted.

Recital and Recital Committee
For recitals given for credit, the recital committee is the same
as the hearing committee whenever possible. The final grade
is a composite of those of at least two committee members,
including the studio instructor, with the studio instructor’s
grade valued at two thirds of the total. Copies of committee
member’s grades are kept by the instructor. Recitals not given
for credit are not graded; they involve a hearing committee but
not a recital committee.
Extracurricular Performance
Students must be in good standing and have the consent of
their private instructors in order to participate in any extracurricular performance activities, including in-school collaboration, that are not required by a student’s degree program or
honor scholarship.
Recital Attendance
Each semester in residence, students (except graduating seniors
in their penultimate or final semester) are required to register
for and attend weekly student recitals/convocations on Fridays
at 12:10 p.m. and a minimum of six Blair faculty or professional
concerts or their community equivalents as described on the
syllabus. Students must fulfill both aspects of the requirement
to pass each semester. The course receives zero credit hours but
is graded on a Pass/Fail basis and listed on students’ transcripts.
Incompletes will not be granted except in the case of documented medical emergency.
Students must register their attendance at each recital.
Two absences from Friday afternoon recitals are permitted
each semester. Under extraordinary circumstances, make-up
assignments can be obtained from the recital attendance coordinator with the permission of the associate dean. Students
must plan and keep up with their concert attendance. Except
for weekly student recitals, performances in which students

263

are participants do not fulfill the attendance requirement for
the performer. Deadline for completion of all work is listed
on the course syllabus for MUSO 1000. The first failure would
result in the loss of the senior penultimate or final semester
exemption. Additional failure(s) would require students to
enroll for additional semester(s) until the seven required
semesters are passed.
Change of Address
Any change of address should be reported to the Blair
Office of Academic Services and also be submitted to the
University Registrar at yes.vanderbilt.edu. The university will
consider notices or other information delivered if mailed to
the address currently on file.
Leave of Absence
A student in good standing may, with the approval of the
associate dean, take leave of absence for one or two semesters.
Application forms, available from the Blair Office of Academic
Services, must be submitted by 1 December for spring semester
leave or by 1 May for fall semester.
Students planning to study elsewhere while on leave
(elective courses) must have prior approval if credits are to
be transferable. Upon the student’s return, a performance
examination during the first two weeks of the semester may
be needed to determine the student’s standing in the major
performance area.
Registration notifications are emailed to students on leave.
A student failing to register at the conclusion of the stated
leave will be withdrawn from the university and must apply
for readmission.
Students who have been on leave of absence and not
enrolled for three or more semesters or who leave the university
while on academic probation must re-audition and achieve the
approval of the associate dean prior to readmission.
Withdrawal from the University
Students proposing to withdraw from the university during
any semester must report to the Blair associate dean to initiate
proper clearance procedures. Students are graded on the same
basis as if withdrawing from a course. Students who withdraw
before the end of the eighth week of classes receive a partial
refund of tuition (see the chapter on Financial Information).
Students intending to withdraw from the university for the
following semester should notify the Blair Office of Academic
Services by 1 December for spring semester or by 1 May for the
fall semester.
Students who have withdrawn from the university without
filing a Leave of Absence form must apply for readmission if
they wish to return.

B

264

vanderbilt university

Honors
Founder’s Medal
The Founder’s Medal, signifying first honors, was endowed
by Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt as one of his gifts to the
university. The recipient is named by the Dean after consideration of faculty recommendations as well as grade point
averages of the year’s highest ranking graduates.
Academic Honors Designation
Honors, which are noted on diplomas and published in the
Commencement Program, are earned as follows:
Summa Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average
equals or exceeds that of the top 5 percent of the previous
year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Magna Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average
equals or exceeds that of the next 8 percent of the previous
year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average equals
or exceeds that of the next 12 percent of the previous year’s
Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Honors Program in Music Literature and History
The honors program in music literature and history is
designed to afford superior students the opportunity to
pursue more intensive work within the field of musicology or
ethnomusicology, culminating in the preparation of a senior
honors thesis. The course of study includes seminar work as
well as independent study and writing under the supervision
of a thesis adviser. Students who want to do honors work
should contact the chair of the musicology department in the
fall of their junior year. Departmental approval of a formal
honors thesis prospectus must take place prior to registration
for MUSL 4998 in spring of the junior year or fall of the senior
year. Minimum requirements are a 3.0 GPA overall and 3.3 in
music literature and history courses.
Students accepted into the program must take a total of
9 credit hours: MUSL 4998–4999, Senior Honors Thesis (6
hours), and one course (beyond the MUSL core) chosen from
MUSL 3150, 3220-3240, 3160, 2610, or 3890 (3 hours). In addition, successful completion of the honors program requires
an oral defense of the honors thesis before a faculty committee. This defense will occur at the end of the second semester
of thesis enrollment. Those enrolled in the program who
successfully complete its requirements with distinction may
graduate with Honors or Highest Honors in music literature
and history.
Dean’s List
The Dean’s List recognizes outstanding academic performance
in a semester. Students are named to the Dean’s List when they
earn a grade point average of at least 3.500 while carrying 12 or
more graded hours, with no temporary or missing grades in
any course (credit or non-credit), and no grade of F.

Pi Kappa Lambda
Election to Pi Kappa Lambda National Music Honor Society
signifies superior accomplishment in the field of music. Students elected to membership must be outstanding musically
and scholastically and ranked in the highest 20 percent of the
senior class or the highest 10 percent of the junior class. The
Eta Iota chapter was installed at Vanderbilt on April 8, 1992.
Professor Karen Ann Krieger serves as its president.
Awards and Prizes
Several awards are presented to students at the Blair School
of Music. Announcement is made at the final student recital/
convocation of the spring semester. Each carries a monetary
stipend. Awards, which are published in the Commencement
Program, are as follows:
THE MARGARET BRANSCOMB PRIZE is given annually to a Blair freshman judged by the faculty to have the musical and personal qualities that
best exemplify the spirit and standards of the school. The prize was established by family and friends in memory of Margaret Branscomb, wife of
the late Vanderbilt Chancellor Emeritus Harvie Branscomb.
THE SUE BREWER AWARD was established by the Songwriters Guild
Foundation in memory of Sue Brewer, who befriended many of Nashville’s
struggling songwriters in the late 1960s and 1970s. It is awarded for excellence to a student pursuing a degree in guitar or composition.
THE RICHARD C. COOPER AWARD was established in 2002 by the Pi
Delta Chapter of Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia, to remember the outstanding
contributions made by Chris Cooper to the student experience of music at
Vanderbilt. Nominations are made by student organizations, recognizing
campus-wide leadership in music.
THE ROBIN DICKERSON AWARD was established in 1995 in honor of
soprano Robin Nell Dickerson, B.Mus. ‘94, by Blair faculty and students.
It is awarded by the voice faculty to an outstanding voice major for excellence in performance and scholarship.
THE ANDREW SANG HAN MEMORIAL AWARD was established in
memory of Sang Han, a clarinet performance major at Blair from 2012 to
2015. Sang's dedication to excellence in all areas of performance, from
small chamber ensembles to wind symphony and orchestra, as well as
the care and consideration he showed his peers, served as an example
to his friends and colleagues at the Blair School. This award is presented
through collaboration between the ensemble directors and woodwind/
brass faculty to a woodwind or brass student who demonstrates remarkable musicianship and leadership in all areas of ensemble playing.
THE JEAN AND ALEXANDER HEARD AWARD. Awarded to outstanding
students studying at summer music festivals.
THE JEAN KELLER HEARD PRIZE is designed for a string student seeking
the Bachelor of Music degree. The scholarship fund was established by
the Vanderbilt Women’s Club to honor violinist Jean Keller Heard, wife of
Vanderbilt’s fifth Chancellor, Alexander Heard.

Blair School of Music / Honors
THE MAGDA LACHS AWARD was established in 2008 by Brenda Higgins, her family, and others to commemorate the 100th birthday of Magda
Lachs, who was a passionate opera enthusiast and the mother of Vanderbilt philosophy professor John Lachs. After her death in June of 2011,
several others made generous gifts in her memory. The award is given to
an outstanding voice or orchestra student who participated in the current
year’s Vanderbilt Opera Theatre production.
THE S. S. AND I. M. F. MARSDEN AWARD IN MUSICAL SCHOLARSHIP
is awarded annually to a Blair student for excellence in scholarship, e.g., a
major written paper, on a topic that lies outside the normal core of scholarship. Honors projects, independent study projects, and substantial class
papers are eligible for consideration for the award. Only papers of extraordinary scope, additional outside recognition, or unusual range beyond the
normal core of scholarship are eligible for the Marsden Award.
THE DELENE LAUBENHEIM MCCLURE MEMORIAL PRIZE is given to a
voice major who exhi­bits excellence in opera performance. This prize was
established by alumni and faculty of the Blair School of Music and other
friends of Delene Laubenheim McClure, B.Mus. `91, whose untimely death
foreshortened a promising career in music. Through her participation in
Blair’s first opera productions, Dede helped set a standard for excellence
in performance.

265
THE EXCELLENCE IN PERCUSSION PERFORMANCE AWARD was established in memory of James Harrison Griggs, an outstanding percussion
major, B.Mus. `94. This award is given to a percussion major for excellence
in performance.
THE PRESSER AWARD is presented to a junior for musical and academic
excellence and is the most prestigious honor available to a junior at Blair. At
least one third of the student’s credits must be outside the field of music.
The recipient must have a cumulative grade point average of 3.25 and have
been named to the most recent Dean’s List. The award honors the memory
of Theodore Presser, American publisher and musical philanthropist.
THE DAVID RABIN PRIZE was established by family and friends in memory
of Dr. David Rabin, professor of medicine and of obstetrics and gynecology at Vanderbilt University Medical School, 1975 to 1984. The prize is
awarded annually, based on excellence in musical performance, to a student enrolled at Blair. The fund continues to grow as contributions in honor
of Dr. Rabin are given to the school.
THE SIGMA ALPHA IOTA COLLEGE HONOR AWARD is given annually to
the most outstanding member of the chapter based on scholarship, musicianship, participation in school activities, and contribution to the fraternity
chapter. The award was established in 2000.

THE MICHELSON COLLABORATIVE ARTS AWARD is presented to a
singer, pianist, or voice/piano duo for exceptional performance in vocal
collaborative arts.

THE SIGMA ALPHA IOTA SCHOLARSHIP AWARD is given to the graduating senior who has attained the highest scholastic average during her
college years. The award was established in 2000.

THE ACHIEVEMENT IN TEACHING RECOGNITION AWARD is presented
by the piano faculty to a senior pianist who has demonstrated superior
abilities in both private and group teaching. The recipient must intend to
teach music professionally in an independent studio, in a classroom, or at
the collegiate level. The prize includes a one-year membership to the Tennessee and Nashville Area Music Teachers Association or the equivalent.

THE CHRISTIAN TEAL AWARD recognizes a current string student who
embodies the collaborative spirit of Professor Christian Teal, who retired
as Joseph Joachim Professor of Violin after forty-two years at the Blair
School.

THE ELLIOT AND AILSA NEWMAN PRIZE is presented annually to a
promising clarinetist or woodwind student for excellence in performance.
The prize was endowed by Ailsa Mackay Newman in memory of her husband, Vanderbilt’s Werthan Professor of Experimental Medicine, 1952–
1973, and an avid amateur clarinetist.
THE L. HOWARD “ZEKE” NICAR AWARD is presented annually to the
most outstanding woodwind or brass student. The award was established
by family, faculty, and friends to honor the memory of the Blair School’s
first Assistant Dean for Admissions.

THE BLAIR VOLUNTEER SERVICE THROUGH MUSIC AWARD was newly instituted in 2009 by an anonymous donor and recognizes an outstanding student who has used music in service to others, particularly at W. O.
Smith Community Music School.
THE MARTIN WILLIAMS AWARD was established in memory of Martin Williams, former director of the Smithsonian Institution’s Jazz Program and
Adjunct Professor of Jazz History at Blair. It is presented to the student writing the most outstanding class paper during the academic year. The fund
continues to grow as gifts honoring Mr. Williams are given to the school.

B

266

vanderbilt university

Blair School of Music Courses
Courses are listed in alphabetical order by prefix:
COMP: Composition
MCON: Conducting
MENT: Arts Advocacy, Career Development, and Entrepreneurship
MPED: Pedagogy
MREP: Orchestral Repertoire and Instrument Literature
MUED: Teacher Education
MUKH: Keyboard Harmony
MUSC: Musicianship
MUSE: Ensembles
MUSL: Music Literature and History
MUSO: Other Music Courses
MUTH: Music Theory
MWEL: Musicians’ Wellness
Performance Instruction: Group and Individual (by instrument)
Performance Classes (by instrument)

COMP: Composition
COMP 1000. Composition Studio Class. [Formerly MUS O 111C]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all composition
majors, including musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] S layton,
L ink, Kurek, Michael R ose.
COMP 1100. Composition Workshop. [Formerly MUS C 230] Collaborative workshop open to composition majors and non-majors.
Includes introduction to compositional techniques, study of composers and their works, principles of scoring, and the study of notation,
including experimental types. Prerequisite: MUT H 1210, MUT H 2200,
or equivalent skills. FALL . [3] Kurek.
COMP 2100. Composition (Elective). [Formerly MUS C 230E] Individual instruction and seminars. A variety of media, styles, and forms.
Electronic and experimental techniques. Prerequisite: COMP 1100 and
consent of instructor. [V ariable credit: 1-3 each semester] Kurek, L ink,
Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 2301. Intermediate Composition I. [Formerly MUS C 141;
COMP 1150] Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media,
styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only
to composition majors; instructor as assigned. [2] Kurek, L ink, Michael
R ose, S layton.
COMP 2302. Intermediate Composition II. [Formerly MUS C 142;
COMP 2200] Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media,
styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only
to composition majors; instructor as assigned. Prerequisite: COMP
2301. [2] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 2303. Intermediate Composition III. [Formerly MUS C 143;
COMP 2300] Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media,
styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only
to composition majors; instructor as assigned. Prerequisite: COMP
2302. [3] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 2304. Intermediate Composition IV. [Formerly MUS C 144;
COMP 2400] Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media,
styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only
to composition majors; instructor as assigned. Prerequisite: COMP
2303. [3] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 3978. Junior Thesis. [Formerly MUS C 228] Completion of an
extended paper based upon musical analysis. Open only to composition/theory majors. T opic subject to approval. Progress monitored via
tutorials. Completion of Junior T hesis is prerequisite for COMP 4970
and COMP 4303. [1] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.

COMP 4301. Advanced Composition I. [Formerly MUS C 241A ; COMP
4300] Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition majors. A
4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 2304.
[3-4 each semester] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 4302. Advanced Composition II. [Formerly MUS C 241B; COMP
4301] Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition/theory
majors. A 4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused
opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP
4301. [3-4 each semester] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 4303. Advanced Composition III. [Formerly MUS C 241C;
COMP 4302] Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition/
theory majors. A 4th credit may be elected with instructor approval
for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 4302, COMP 3978. [3-4 each semester] Kurek, L ink,
Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 4304. Advanced Composition IV. [Formerly MUS C 241D ; COMP
4303] Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition majors. A
4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 4303.
[3-4 each semester] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.
COMP 4970. Senior Composition Recital. [Formerly MUS C 299]
Planning, rehearsing, and performing in a concert devoted solely to
a student’s own work. Open only to composition majors. Corequisite:
COMP 4303. [1] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton.

MCON : Conducting
MCON 3000. Conducting. [Formerly MUS O 261] A n introductory
course of study stressing the fundamentals of movement and gesture
as they relate to style, articulation, phrasing, tempo, cueing, etc. S core
reading at the piano. Prerequisite: MUS C 2200, MU KH 1134 or 2134,
and MUT H 2400. FALL , S PRIN G. [2] Fountain, P. S chneller, V errier.
MCON 3010. Instrumental Conducting. [Formerly MUS O 262] Expansion of basic skills to include longer and more complex musical structures; expanded ability in analysis, memorization, and interpretation;
significant independent preparation. Prerequisite: MCON 3000 and
consent of instructor. [2] S PRIN G. Fountain.
MCON 3020. Choral Conducting. [Formerly MUS O 263] Choral conducting and rehearsal techniques, score reading and analysis, methods, and materials of choral music. Prerequisite: MCON 3000 and consent of instructor. S PRIN G. [2] Biddlecombe. (Offered alternate years)

MENT : A rts A dvocacy, Career D evelopment,
and Entrepreneurship
MENT 1120. The Business of Music. [Formerly MUS O 100] A general
survey of music in the world of commerce. S ystems of the contemporary
music business, with special emphasis on the recording industry. Music
business professionals as guest lecturers. FALL , S PRIN G. [3] Porter.
MENT 1122. The Business of Music II. A n in-depth study of the rapidly changing entertainment industry and the effects of the digital revolution on the current and historical business models. T opics include
the record company, music publishing and songwriting, artist management, touring, and concert promotion. Music professionals as guest
lecturers. Prerequisite: MENT 1120. [3] D ubois.
MENT 1130. Building Communities through Music and the Arts.
[Formerly MUS O 106] T he philosophical and strategic background for
and practical skills in audience-focused and audience-engaged arts

Blair School of Music / Courses
programming. T echniques to make music both accessible and relevant to learners; development of interactive programs and curriculumdirected programs; form, structure, and pacing of programs, including
repertoire selection and duration, presentation of music, and participatory experiences. FALL . [1] Korn.
MENT 1135. Arts Administration: Best Practices and Careers in the
Arts Organization Marketplace. A study of best practices and development of marketable skills in arts administration. Investigation of arts
administration employment opportunities, roles and responsibilities in
executive leadership, finances, fundraising, artistic leadership, education, organizational development, and marketing and media. L eading
arts institutions are studied as models for arts administration careers
and professional advancement. Guest artist administrators will further
class discussion and real world application. [1] Korn.
MENT 1140. Creating Funding and Non-Profit Vehicles for 21st Century Community Service. [Formerly MUS O 107] S trategies for planning,
financing, supporting, and sustaining an artistic and social development
mission. S pecific tools for creating mission-driven music, arts and community service organizational structures. S PRIN G. [2] Korn.
MENT 3100. Career Preparedness: The Business of a Music Professional. [Formerly MUS O 201] Prepares students for a career in music
and its related fields. Emphasis on essential skills for resume writing,
financial management, interviewing/auditioning, media relations, copyright/ownership, career adaptability, and developing an artistic vision.
Prerequisite: Junior and senior B.Mus. students and second majors in
music. FALL . [1] Korn.
MENT 3110. 21st Century Artistry: Advanced Skills in Live Performance, Technology and Communication. [Formerly MUS O 233] S kills
for artistry, employment, audience engagement, communications, and
the business of live music performance and recording. Emphasis on
live and recorded stage and communication presentation; utilization of
laptops as recording and live technologies; and creative application of
technology, creativity, advocacy and business skills for employment.
Prerequisite: MUT H 2400 or permission of instructor. FALL . [3] Korn.
MENT 3880. Music Internship (1 credit). [Formerly MUS O 280A ] A cademic research and writing related to a corequisite internship experience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA ,
sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty
sponsor and by associate dean. May be repeated for credit, up to 1
credit per semester of enrollment. FALL , S PRIN G. [1]
MENT 3881. Music Internship (3 credit hours). [Formerly MUS O
280B] A n extensive academic program of study related to a corequisite
internship experience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA , sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty sponsor and by A ssociate D ean. May be repeated for
credit, up to 3 credit hours per semester of enrollment. FALL , S PRIN G,
SU MMER . [3]
MENT 3882. Summer Music Internship. [Formerly MUS O 280C] Academic research and writing related to a corequisite internship experience
under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA, sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty sponsor and
by Associate Dean. Offered on a pass/fail basis only. May be repeated for
credit, up to 1 credit per semester of enrollment. SU MMER . [1]

MPED : Pedagogy
MPED 3100. Guitar Pedagogy. [Formerly MUS O 268] Principles and
procedures of teaching classical guitar. Instructional methods and their
applications with different age levels. A ttention given to individual and
group instruction. S PRIN G. [2] T odd. (Offered alternate years)
MPED 3110. Piano Pedagogy. [Formerly MUS O 266] Principles and
procedures of teaching piano. Individual and group instruction techniques observed and discussed. Practicum with private students.
D esigned for piano majors; others admitted with consent of instructor.
FALL . [2] Krieger. (Offered alternate years)

267
MPED 3120. Suzuki Violin Pedagogy. [Formerly MUS O 265A ] Principles and procedures of teaching violin using the S uzuki V iolin S chool,
books 1-4. Individual and group instruction techniques observed and
discussed. D esigned for junior or senior violin/viola students. V iolin for
class use required. Open by consent of instructor. FALL . [3] (Offered
alternate years)
MPED 3121. Suzuki Violin Pedagogy. [Formerly MUS O 265B] Principles and procedures of teaching violin using the S uzuki V iolin S chool,
books 14. Individual and group instruction techniques observed and
discussed. D esigned for junior or senior violin/viola students. V iolin for
class use required. Open by consent of instructor. Prerequisite: MPED
3120. S PRIN G. [3] (Offered alternate years)
MPED 3125. Violin/Viola Pedagogy. Principles and procedures of
teaching violin and viola. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Practicum with private students. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students with completion of four semesters of 2100 or
2200 in violin or viola. [2] McGann.
MPED 3130. Vocal Pedagogy. [Formerly MUS O 269] Principles
and procedures of teaching voice. Psychological and physiological
approaches. Practicum with private students. Corequisite: V OIC 4100
or V OIC 4200 FALL . [2] N elson. (Offered alternate years)
MPED 3140. Woodwind Pedagogy. Principles and procedures of
teaching woodwind instruments. Emphasis on pedagogical literature
and specific teaching techniques. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students with
completion of four semesters of 2100 or 2200 in major instrument, or
permission of instructor. [2]
MPED 3870. Pedagogy Practicum. [Formerly MUS O 271] Principles and
procedures of private teaching. R eading and research under the direction of a faculty sponsor, consistent with requirements for Independent
S tudy. Practicum with private students. Consent of the faculty sponsor is
required. [R epeatable for credit, variable 1-2 hours each semester] S taff.
MPED 3880. Pedagogy Internship. [Formerly MUS O 281] Focused
experience in the teaching of performance under the direction of a faculty sponsor in that performance area (consent required). Involves a
specific program of regular consultation between student and supervising teacher. Open only to students seeking concentration in pedagogy. Prerequisite: MRE P 3310 or 3311, 3300, 3330, or MUS O 3850 (in
field) and MPED 3110, 3100, or 3130 or MUS O 3850 (in field). [R epeatable for credit, variable 1-3 hours each semester] S taff.

MRE P: Orchestral R epertoire and Instrument
L iterature
MREP 2110. Brass Orchestral Repertoire. [Formerly MUS O 252]
Exploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis on the
late R omantic period. Performance of selected excerpts, coached and
conducted. May be repeated for credit. FALL . [2] Wilson.
MREP 2120. Orchestral Repertoire for Percussion. [Formerly MUS O
253A ] Exploration of the standard orchestral repertoire for percussion
instruments, exclusive of timpani, with emphasis on score analysis,
instrument selection, and performance techniques. S elected excerpts
coached and conducted. S PRIN G. [1] Jung.
MREP 2121. Orchestral Repertoire for Timpani. [Formerly MUS O
253B] Exploration of the standard orchestral repertoire for timpani.
Emphasis on score analysis, editing, stick selection, and performance
practice. S elected excerpts coached and conducted. FALL . [1] Wiggins.
MREP 2130. String and Harp Orchestral Repertoire. [Formerly
MUS O 254A ] A nalysis and coaching of the standard orchestral repertoire, including opera and ballet, with emphasis on style and technical problems. S elected excerpts in like instrument groups (violin, viola,
cello, bass, harp). May be repeated for credit. [1] Copely, Iwasaki, Mansell, R einker, R eist, Wanner.

B

268
MREP 2140. Woodwind Orchestral Repertoire. [Formerly MUS O
251] Exploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis
on performance practice. Performance of selected excerpts, coached
and conducted. N ot recommended for freshmen. May be repeated for
credit. S PRIN G. [1] Woodwind faculty.
MREP 2141. Saxophone Orchestral and Wind Band Repertoire.
Exploration of the standard orchestral and wind band repertoire with
emphasis on performance practice. Performance of selected excerpts,
coached and conducted. N ot recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students or permission of instructor. [1] U tley.
MREP 3300. Guitar Literature. [Formerly MUS O 258] S urvey of literature for the classical guitar from the sixteenth century to the twentieth century. V arious systems of notation including lute and vihuela are
explored. FALL . [2] T odd. (Offered alternate years)
MREP 3310. Piano Literature I. [Formerly MUS O 256A ] A survey of
works for piano from the seventeenth through the nineteenth centuries,
within the context of historical perspective, stylistic awareness, and
pianism. D esigned primarily for piano majors. S PRIN G. [2] N ies, Wait.
(Offered alternate years)
MREP 3311. Piano Literature II. [Formerly MUS O 256B] A survey of
works for piano from the nineteenth through the twenty-first centuries,
within the context of historical perspective, stylistic awareness, and
pianism. D esigned primarily for piano majors. FALL . [2] N ies, Wait.
(Offered alternate years)
MREP 3330. Vocal Literature. [Formerly MUS O 259] S urvey of literature for solo voice from the seventeenth century to the present, with
focus on traditional art songs of the great masters of the genre. Prerequisite: MUT H 2300, MUSL 2200W. Corequisite: V OIC 4100 or V OIC
4200. FALL . [2] Jarman. (Offered alternate years)

MUED : T eacher Education
MUED 1010. Woodwind Methods. [Formerly MUST 101] D evelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for flute, clarinet,
oboe, bassoon, and saxophone. Includes teaching techniques and
problems relative to woodwind instruments, care and minor repairs,
and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL . [1] U tley.
MUED 1020. Brass Methods. [Formerly MUST 102] D evelopment
of performance skills and teaching methods for trumpet, french horn,
trombone, euphonium, and tuba. Includes teaching techniques and
problems relative to brass instruments, care and minor repairs, and
instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of
instructor. S PRIN G. [1] Beckman.
MUED 1030. Strings Methods. [Formerly MUST 103] D evelopment of
performance skills and teaching methods for violin, viola, cello, and double bass. Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to string
instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open
only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL . [1] Bingham.
MUED 1040. Percussion Methods. [Formerly MUST 104] D evelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for snare drum, timpani, mallet instruments, and other percussion instruments. Includes
teaching techniques and problems relative to all percussion instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only
to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL . [1] Wiggins.
MUED 1050. Classroom Instruments Methods. [Formerly MUST
105] D evelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for
instruments such as recorder, Orff, classroom percussion, and others.
Includes methods and materials for elementary general music, emphasizing development of children’s ability to sing and play classroom
instruments. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor.
S PRIN G. [1] A lley.
MUED 1060. Child and Adolescent Voices. [Formerly MUST 106] A
study of the vocal development and maturity of children from pre-K
through high school with an emphasis on healthy production, pitch-

vanderbilt university
matching skills, learning styles, warm-up exercises, the changing voice
in boys and girls, and examples of appropriate literature. Open only to
B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. S PRIN G. [1] P. S chneller.
MUED 1070. Secondary Instrument Lab. [Formerly MUST 107]
D evelopment of performance skills and teaching methods on a secondary instrument while in an ensemble setting. Includes methodologies prescribed for teaching secondary band and orchestra. Open only
to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. Prerequisite: MUED
1010 or 1020 and MUED 1030. S PRIN G. [1] Perez.
MUED 2010. Introduction to Music Education. Focus on lesson planning, proper teaching sequences, observation techniques, classroom
instruments, and verbal/non-verbal instruction. First in a sequence of
three methods-based courses in teaching music. Open to all B.Mus.
students. S ophomore standing required. [3] T . Biddlecombe.
MUED 2110. Seminar in Teaching Choral Literature. [Formerly MUST
211] T eaching techniques and knowledge of choral repertoire as applicable to K12 choral programs. T onal, harmonic, and melodic analysis,
score marking and preparation, and classroom concerns. R epertoire
drawn from the N ational A merican Choral D irectors’ A ssociation reading lists, A ll-S tate honor choir lists, and other applicable sources to
encompass a broad range of genres, styles, levels of difficulty, ethnicities, and musical periods. Prerequisite: MUT H 2200 and approval
of instructor. S PRIN G. [2] M. Biddlecombe. (Offered alternate years)
MUED 2120. Seminar in Teaching Orchestra. [Formerly MUST 212]
Instructional strategies for string and full orchestras from the middle
school through high school and youth orchestra levels. T opics to
include rehearsal techniques, repertoire, materials, secondary string
class instruction, and performance practices. Prerequisite: MUED
1030 and MCON 3000, or permission of instructor. S PRIN G. [2] Madole.
(Offered alternate years)
MUED 2130. Seminar in Orff/Kodaly Methods. [Formerly MUST 213]
T eaching general music with emphasis on Orff and Kodaly principles
and practices. Planning, instruction, and evaluation using techniques
and materials from a variety of sources. FALL . [2] R amsey. (Offered
alternate years)
MUED 2140. Seminar in Teaching Jazz Styles. [Formerly MUST 214]
Principles and practices for teaching instrumental jazz styles. R ehearsal
techniques (including observation), repertoire, jazz education philosophies,
and stylistic elements for soloists, combos, and larger ensembles. Prerequisite: MUS O 1220 or permission of instructor. S PRIN G. [2] Middagh.
MUED 2150. Seminar in Teaching Marching Band. [Formerly MUST
215] T echniques and materials for Marching Band instruction. Organization, administration, literature, technology, auxiliary groups. Planning,
writing, arranging and teaching halftime performances. Prerequisite or
corequisite: MCON 3000 or permission of instructor; corequisite: participation in marching band. FALL . [2] Beckman.
MUED 2160. Seminar in Teaching Musicianship. [Formerly MUST 216]
Principles and procedures involved in teaching aural musicianship to K12
students, in both private and classroom environments. L ecture, discussion plus interactive activities that explore musical perception and cognition. Prerequisite: MUS C 2400. FALL . [2] Ploger. (Offered alternate years)
MUED 2170. Seminar in Teaching Band. [Formerly MUST 217] Knowledge of repertoire and teaching techniques as applicable to grades
4-12 band programs. R epertoire to be drawn from several states’ standardized lists that employ comprehensive musicianship in teaching and
meeting national standards. S PRIN G. [2] Beckman.
MUED 3870. Practicum in Music Teaching. [Formerly MUST 250A ]
Observation, participation, and supervised music teaching in a variety
of school, grade level, and instructional music settings, designed to integrate and apply musical knowledge and teaching skills developed within
the degree program. Weekly seminar included. Includes S MART music
studio technology and GarageBand technology. S PRIN G. [1] D . Cassel.
MUED 3871. Practicum in Music Teaching II. [Formerly MUST 250B]
Observation, participation, and supervised music teaching in a variety
of school, grade level, and instructional music settings, designed to

Blair School of Music / Courses
integrate and apply musical knowledge and teaching skills developed
within the degree program. Weekly seminar included. Prerequisite:
MUED 3870. S PRIN G. [1] Perez.
MUED 3872. Practicum in Music Teaching III. [Formerly MUST 250C]
Observation, participation, and supervised music teaching in a variety
of school, grade level, and instructional music settings, designed to
integrate and apply musical knowledge and teaching skills developed
within the degree program. Weekly seminar included. Prerequisite:
MUED 3871 and any two from MUED 2110-2170. S PRIN G. [1] T . Biddlecombe, Perez.
MUED 3880. Experiential Instruction in Music I. Field-based experience with a precollege ensemble or university band organization. Experience will include classroom preparation, leading sectionals or portions of rehearsals, and/or other appropriate activities as assigned by
the lead teacher. A ttendance at culminating performance is required.
[.5] T . Biddlecombe.

MU KH: Keyboard Harmony
MUKH 1130. Introductory Keyboard Harmony. [Formerly MUS C
130] Introduction to repertoire, technique, transposition, harmonization,
improvisation, and sight reading. D esigned for B.Mus. students who
have no piano background. Provides preparation for the Keyboard Harmony sequence. FALL . [1] Middleton, Williams.
MUKH 1131. Keyboard Harmony I. [Formerly MUS C 131A] Development
of basic technique, reading proficiency, elementary transposition. Diatonic
harmony at the keyboard. Prerequisite: Placement test. N ot open to students who have completed MU KH 2133 or 2134. [1] Middleton, Williams.
MUKH 1132. Keyboard Harmony II. [Formerly MUS C 131B] D evelopment of basic technique, reading proficiency, elementary transposition. D iatonic harmony at the keyboard. Prerequisite: Placement test or
MU KH 1131. N ot open to students who have completed MU KH 2133
or 2134. [1] Koutsoukos.
MUKH 1133. Keyboard Harmony III. [Formerly MUS C 132A ] Harmonization of melodies, improvisation of small musical forms, transposition in all keys with cadences and modulations, four-part score reading. Prerequisite: MU KH 1132. S trongly recommended: C- or above in
1132. N ot open to students who have completed MU KH 2133 or 2134.
[1] Koutsoukos.
MUKH 1134. Keyboard Harmony IV. [Formerly MUS C 132B] Harmonization of melodies, improvisation of small musical forms, transposition in all keys with cadences and modulations, four-part score reading. Prerequisite: MU KH 1133. S trongly recommended: C- or above in
1133. N ot open to students who have completed MU KH 2133 or 2134.
[1] Koutsoukos.
MUKH 2133. Accelerated Keyboard Harmony I. [Formerly MUS C
133A ] Functional skills are reinforced with pedagogy, music theory,
harmony, and ear training. T opics include improvisation, musical styles,
and computer MIDI technology. For keyboard majors or by consent
of instructor. Prerequisite: Placement test. N ot open to students who
have completed MU KH 1131-1132 or 1133-1134. FALL . [2] Krieger.
MUKH 2134. Accelerated Keyboard Harmony II. [Formerly MUS C
133B] Intensive study of materials presented in MU KH 2133. Prerequisite: MU KH 2133. S trongly recommended: C- or above in 2133. N ot
open to students who have completed 1133, 1134. S PRIN G. [2] Krieger.

MUS C: Musicianship
MUSC 2100. Musicianship Level I. [Formerly MUS C 170E] Examination of the sound properties of pitches, intervals and rhythms and their
notation in real time. Focus is on diatonic scales and modes. L ectures,
discussion, real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing,
score reading, and improvisation are integrated throughout the course.
Corequisite: MUT H 2100. FALL . [1] McGuire, Williams.

269
MUSC 2200. Musicianship Level II. [Formerly MUS C 171E] Continuation of Musicianship L evel I. Focus on the employment of pitches,
intervals and rhythms in functional tonal contexts. L ectures, discussion,
real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing, score reading,
and improvisation are integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite:
MUS C 2100; corequisite: MUT H 2200. S PRIN G. [1] McGuire, Williams.
MUSC 2300. Musicianship Level III. [Formerly MUS C 172E] Continuation
of Musicianship II. Focus on tonal modulation and chromaticism. L ectures,
discussion, real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing, score
reading, and improvisation are integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: MUS C 2200; corequisite: MUT H 2300. FALL . [1] McGuire.
MUSC 2400. Musicianship Level IV. [Formerly MUS C 173E] Continuation of Musicianship III . Focus on the employment of pitches, intervals
and rhythms in non-tonal contexts. L ectures, discussion, real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing, score reading, and improvisation are integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: MUS C
2300; corequisite: MUT H 2400. S PRIN G. [1] McGuire.
MUSC 3105. Advanced Musicianship V. [Formerly MUS C 271E] Further development of aural skills, including techniques for hearing, singing, reading, and writing tonal and atonal music in real time. Prerequisite: MUS C 2400. FALL . [1] Ploger.
MUSC 3106. Advanced Musicianship VI. [Formerly MUS C 272E] Further development of aural skills, including techniques for hearing, singing, reading, and writing tonal and atonal music in real time. Prerequisite: MUS C 3105. S PRIN G. [1] Ploger.
MUSC 3107. Advanced Musicianship VII. [Formerly MUS C 273E] A
continuation of techniques studied in MUS C 3106. Hearing in tonal
and atonal music, including extended harmonic and melodic structures, complex rhythmic elements, and score reading. D iscussion of
pedagogical approaches to teaching aural studies. Prerequisite: MUS C
3106. FALL . [1] Ploger.
MUSC 3108. Advanced Musicianship VIII. [Formerly MUS C 274E]
A continuation of techniques studied in MUS C 3107. Hearing in tonal
and atonal music, including extended harmonic and melodic structures, complex rhythmic elements, and score reading. D iscussion of
pedagogical approaches to teaching aural studies. Prerequisite: MUS C
3107. S PRIN G. [1] Ploger.
MUSC 3109. Musicianship: Brahms and Romanticism; Solo and
Small Chamber Works. [Formerly MUS C 276E] A study of skills
needed to perform, aurally comprehend and mentally analyze the solo
vocal and instrumental plus small chamber works for strings, winds and
keyboard of Brahms, with comparative studies of works of S chumann
and Chopin. L ecture, discussion, guided listening exercises, class performance participation and score reading. Prerequisite: MUS C 2400.
[1] Ploger. (N ot currently offered)

MUSE: Ensembles
All MUSE courses are repeatable. Students may accrue up to 6 credit
hours per semester of enrollment.
MUSE 1010. Instrumental Ensembles. [Formerly MUSE 101] Open by
audition to all V anderbilt students. Musicians participate in orchestra,
wind ensembles, and/or a variety of smaller ensembles on a rotational
basis through the course of the semester. Performances include symphonic repertoire from the Classical and R omantic periods as well as
standard and new repertoire from Baroque to Contemporary. A t least
three formal concerts are presented each semester. [1] Fountain, V errier.
MUSE 1020. Vanderbilt Symphonic Choir. [Formerly MUSE 101A ]
Open by audition to all members of the V anderbilt community, this choral ensemble performs literature requiring large forces, such as masses
and oratorios. A t least one formal concert each semester and at least
one work each year with the V anderbilt Orchestra. [1] T . Biddlecombe.
MUSE 1030. Vanderbilt Opera Theatre. [Formerly MUSE 101F] Open
by audition to all V anderbilt students. Performance material chosen from

B

270
all forms of lyric theatre: standard operatic repertoire, operetta, and
A merican musical theatre. A t least one production is presented. [1] S hay.
MUSE 1120. Guitar Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 204] Open by consent of instructor. [1] T odd, Phillips.
MUSE 1130. Harp Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 209] Open by consent
of instructor. [1] Copely.
MUSE 1140. Percussion Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 210] Open by
consent of instructor to all V anderbilt percussionists, this ensemble
performs repertoire from the 1930’s (works by composers such as Harrison, Cowell, Cage et al.) to the current influences of D e L a Guarda,
Blue Man Group, technology, multi-media, and broad theatrical concepts. Group sizes and use of a conductor vary according to repertoire.
A t least one formal concert per semester. [1] (N ot currently offered)
MUSE 1160. Saxophone Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 207] Open by
consent of instructor. [1] U tley.
MUSE 1200. Steel Drum/Pan Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 150A ]
Open to all members of the V anderbilt community, this course provides a laboratory and performance experience drawing on Caribbean
steel drums/pans with emphasis on the music and dance repertories
of the island of T rinidad. L ecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one
weekly two-hour session. A t least one public performance each semester. N o previous experience required. [1] Britain.
MUSE 1210. Steel Drum/Pan Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 150B]
Open to all members of the V anderbilt community, this course provides a laboratory and performance experience drawing on Caribbean
steel drums/pans with emphasis on the music and dance repertories
of the island of T rinidad. L ecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one
weekly two-hour session. A t least one public performance each semester. A bility to read musical notation required. [1] Britain.
MUSE 1220. Steel Drum/Pan Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 150C]
Open to all members of the V anderbilt community, this course provides a laboratory and performance experience drawing on Caribbean
steel drums/pans with emphasis on the music and dance repertories
of the island of T rinidad. L ecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one
weekly two-hour session. A t least one public performance each semester. A bility to read musical notation required. Prerequisite: MUSE 1200
or 1210. [1] Britain.
MUSE 1230. African Performing Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 171]
Open to all members of the V anderbilt community, this course provides
a laboratory and performance experience drawing on traditional A frican musical instruments (drums, percussion, winds) with an emphasis
on West A frican (Ghana) and East A frican (U ganda) music and dance
repertories. L ecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one weekly twohour session. A t least one public performance each semester. N o previous experience required. [1] A hima.
MUSE 1240. Fiddle Ensemble. [Formerly MUSE 212] Open by audition to all V anderbilt students with fiddling experience. One hour weekly
coaching by visiting fiddlers from the community. Fiddle tunes, harmonies, and improvisation ideas in various styles of fiddle music, including old-time, bluegrass, swing, Celtic, and contemporary. One performance each semester. [1] Combs, Plohman.
MUSE 1310. Jazz Ensemble: Big Band. [Formerly MUSE 131] Open
by audition to all V anderbilt students, this ensemble performs both
traditional and modern jazz styles, including dance band, swing, contemporary, and charts currently under development. Improvisation, jazz
timbres, and other idiomatic concepts explored through lecture-demonstration and performance. A t least one concert is presented each
semester. [1] Middagh.
MUSE 1320. Jazz Ensemble: Small Combo. [Formerly MUSE 132]
Open by audition to all V anderbilt students. Provides focused laboratory training for performance of composed and improvised small
combo jazz traditions. D iscussion and application of techniques associated with solo, sectional, and ensemble performance in jazz. A t least
one concert is presented each semester. [1] S pencer.

vanderbilt university
MUSE 1330. Blair Jazz Choir. Open by audition to all V anderbilt students; ensemble is limited to 12 voices, plus rhythm section. R epertoire
includes scat, contemporary, and standard jazz. On- and off-campus
performances throughout the semester. [1] Watson.
MUSE 2120. Vanderbilt Chorale. [Formerly MUSE 201A ] Open
by audition to all V anderbilt students, this select 36-40 voice choral
ensemble performs music in a variety of styles. A t least two formal
concerts each semester. [1] T . Biddlecombe.
MUSE 2210. Instrumental Chamber Music. [Formerly MUSE 221]
Open to all V anderbilt students by audition or upon recommendation
of the private instructor. S ize of ensembles may vary. One hour weekly
coaching. T wo hours of additional rehearsal each week. [V ariable credit:
½, 1, or 2 each semester] D orfman, Hauser, Jackson, Kochanowski,
Kolkay, L ong, Miahky, Melissa R ose, Wilson, performance faculty.
MUSE 2220. Chamber Music: Percussion. [Formerly MUSE 215]
Open to percussion majors and minors. S ize of ensembles will vary.
One hour weekly coaching and two hours of additional rehearsal (independent of coaching) expected each week. [½ or 1] Jung.
MUSE 2230. Chamber Music: Sonata Class for Strings and Piano.
[Formerly MUSE 223] One hour weekly class for performance and
study of string (violin, viola, cello, bass) and piano sonatas from the
standard repertoire, baroque through modern, with each sonata duo
receiving thirty minutes of coaching within the class time. Performance
of complete sonata during the last class of the semester. T wo hours
of additional rehearsal each week. Open by consent of instructor. [1]
D orfman, Plummer.
MUSE 2240. Chamber Music: String Quartet. [Formerly MUSE 224]
Open by consent of instructor. One hour of coaching and at least two
hours of additional rehearsal each week. [V ariable credit: ½, 1, or 2
each semester] Kochanowski.
MUSE 2250. Chamber Music: Brass Quintet. [Formerly MUSE 225]
Open by consent of instructor. [½ or 1] S ibaja, L ong, Wilson.
MUSE 2260. Chamber Music: Woodwind Quintet. [Formerly MUSE
226] Open by consent of instructor. [½ or 1] Hauser, Jackson, Kolkay.
MUSE 2270. Baroque Chamber Music. Open to all V anderbilt students with experience on Baroque instruments or upon recommendation of the private instructor. S ize of ensembles may vary. S tudents will
receive one hour of coaching and are expected to rehearse at least two
additional hours each week.
MUSE 2300. Collaborative Techniques for Pianists. [Formerly MUSE
102] Basic techniques of vocal and instrumental collaboration. Choral/
orchestral score reading, orchestral reductions, continuo realization,
modern editions of early music, musical terms, diction, and ensemble
techniques. Performance of vocal and instrumental accompaniments.
Both group and individual coaching. Open only to B.Mus. piano majors
in fall; by consent of instructor in spring. [1] Melissa R ose.
MUSE 2310. Collaborative Piano: Instrumental. [Formerly MUSE
222] Introduces pianists to collaboration with instrumentalists. Weekly
coaching with piano instructor and 5 hours practice/rehearsal per week.
S tandard instrumental repertoire will be assigned. Open by consent of
instructor. [V ariable credit: ½, 1, or 2 each semester] D orfman, N ies,
Melissa R ose.
MUSE 2320. Collaborative Piano: Vocal. [Formerly MUSE 201B]
Introduces pianists to collaboration with singers. Weekly coaching with
piano instructor and 5 hours practice/rehearsal per week. Focus on
standard art song and opera repertoire. Open by consent of instructor.
[V ariable credit: 1-2 each semester] D orfman, N ies, Melissa R ose.
MUSE 2330. Vocal Chamber Music. [Formerly MUSE 201D ] Open by
consent of the instructor. One hour weekly coaching for vocal/instrumental duos or ensembles, including singer/piano duos. T wo hours of
additional rehearsal each week. [V ariable credit: ½, 1, or 2 each semester] D orfman, Melissa R ose.

Blair School of Music / Courses

MUSL : Music L iterature and History
MUSL 1100. World Music. [Formerly MUSL 160] World music as a
cultural product; selected musics of A frica, N ative A merica, India, Indonesia, and A frican A merica. T opics include music and religion, popular
music, field work methodology, and gender issues. N ot open to students who have completed MUSL 2100. FALL . [3] Barz, Fry.
MUSL 1105. African Music. [Formerly MUSL 171] A survey of selected
traditional and popular music of A frica. Historical, social, and cultural
contexts; listening; some performances in class. S PRIN G. [3] Barz.
MUSL 1111. First-Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly MUSL 115F] Independent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can
express knowledge and defend opinions through class discussion, oral
presentations, and written expression. T opics vary. Open to freshmen
only. FALL . [3] Musicology and Ethnomusicology faculty.
MUSL 1200. Introduction to Music Literature. [Formerly MUSL 140]
A n introduction to the literature of music from A .D . 600 to the present
through a study of selected works. Extensive listening is required. N ot
open to students who have completed MUSL 2200W. D oes not count
toward a major in music. FALL , S PRIN G. [3] Hime.
MUSL 1210. The Concerto. [Formerly MUSL 143] A close study of
representative works, from the Baroque invention of the concerto principle up to modernist and contemporary adaptations. Focus on structural listening. N o previous training in music required. FALL . [3] Michael
R ose. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 1220. The Symphony. [Formerly MUSL 144] Orchestral literature with emphasis on the evolution of symphonic form and style,
through the study of selected masterworks of the standard repertoire.
FALL . [3] Hime, Michael R ose.
MUSL 1230. Survey of Choral Music. [Formerly MUSL 145] Choral
literature, sacred and secular, from the R enaissance to the present,
with emphasis on a study of selected masterworks from each period.
S PRIN G. [3] Hime.
MUSL 1300. Music, the Arts, and Ideas. [Formerly MUSL 183] T he
changing historical relationships among music, literature, fine arts, and
philosophy. Musical developments as responses to social, political,
and economic circumstances. FALL . [3] L ink.
MUSL 1310. Love and Death in Music. [Formerly MUSL 184] Perspectives on two great problems of human life throughout the history of
Western music. T hemes include idealized love, sexual pathology, love
and realism, love of God, confronting death, transcending death. Connections of music to visual arts, literature, film. N o musical background
required. [3] Michael R ose. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 1320. The Music of the Outliers. S eminar centering on the
music of composers who were/are unorthodox in their thinking, who
resisted prescribed notions of what music is and challenged the world
around them to think about sound in new ways. T opics include the
“reactionary” climate of the 20th century; modernism and post-modernism; electronics in music; minimalism and microtonalism; performance
art and “A rt-Pop.” N ot open to students who have completed MUT H
2400. D oes not count toward a major in music. N o prior experience in
music necessary. Maymester. [3] S layton.
MUSL 1350. Music, Art, and Disability. U sing music as a nexus for
considerations of visual art, literature and film, this course explores relationships between disability, its theorization, cultural works and their
reception. Grounded in two tenets of current disability theory i.e. that disability is contextually constructed and that works of art, including music,
can be viewed as a type of body in themselves, this course explores art
and music as spaces in which human physiological, psychological, and
cognitive disability and impairment have agency, substance and power.
Prerequisite: A ny art history or music history course. [3] L ink.
MUSL 1600. American Popular Music. [Formerly MUSL 149] Historical study of ways the culture of a nation is reflected and sometimes
shaped by the chosen musics of the groups comprising the A merican
“salad bowl.” T opics include audience reception; production and consumption; multiculturalism; and meaning. S PRIN G. [3] Gunderman.

271
MUSL 1610. Musical Theatre in America: A Cultural History. [Formerly MUSL 103] From eighteenth century melodrama and vaudeville
through the musicals of the 1940s and 1950s to the contemporary
emphasis on integration of spectacle, dance, and other theatrical arts.
R eadings, live productions, guest lecturers, and film. S PRIN G. [3] L ovensheimer. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 1620. Survey of Jazz. [Formerly MUSL 148] A survey of jazz
history, with particular attention to the major composers, “Jelly R oll”
Morton, D uke Ellington, and T helonius Monk, who gave the music synthesis and form; and to its major innovative soloists, L ouis A rmstrong,
Charlie Parker, and Ornette Coleman, who renewed its musical language. FALL , S PRIN G. [3] Fry.
MUSL 1630. The Blues. [Formerly MUSL 151] D ownhome, classic,
Chicago, and urban blues-history, musical structure, musical styles,
singers’ lives, and meanings of blues lyrics. T he current blues revival,
blues and tourism, race and revisionist blues scholarship, and the relation of blues to A frican A merican poetry and fiction. A rtists such as
Ma R ainey, Charley Patton, R obert Johnson, L ightnin’ Hopkins, Muddy
Waters, B.B. King, Buddy Guy, R obert Cray. S PRIN G. [3] Fry.
MUSL 1640. Country Music. [Formerly MUSL 152] A musical and cultural survey of the talents, traditions, and trends of country music from
its Colonial roots to its current status as a multi-million dollar global
industry. Focus on the music, creators, and performers of that music
and its cultural and social contexts. FALL , S PRIN G. [3] Cooper.
MUSL 1650. History of Rock Music. [Formerly MUSL 153] History and
development of rock and roll music and its performance from the 1950s
to the present. Major artists from each decade, subgenres (rockabilly,
R &B, folk, soul, metal, pop, alternative, etc.), and technological, cultural, and economic developments that helped shape the music. FALL ,
S PRIN G. [3] Gunderman.
MUSL 1660. Music and Tourism: Music City Museum & Memorabilia.
[Formerly MUSL 265] An exploration of the intersection between popular
music and tourism. Music landmarks as tourist attractions, music memorabilia and museums, tourism and urban development, souvenirs as travel
credentials, and tourism and issues of representation. FALL . [3] Fry.
MUSL 2100. Music as Global Culture. [Formerly MUSL 122] Music
and musical cultures from around the world. S tudents will approach
indigenous music theories on their own terms in order to understand
and complement the complexities of contemporary Western Music performance styles and expectations. Emphasis on fundamental elements
(e.g., rhythm, pitch, harmony, and form) of diverse musical practices.
T ranscription, notation, and analysis of a variety of melodic and rhythmic
forms. N ot open to students who have completed MUSL 1100. Prerequisite: Open to B.Mus. students, declared second majors, or with demonstrated musical literacy and permission of instructor. FALL . [3] Fry.
MUSL 2110. Music in Latin America and the Caribbean. [Formerly
MUSL 250] A n introduction to a wide variety of musical genres and
traditions in L atin A merica and the Caribbean. Indigenous, folk, popular, and art music forms and their social function, meaning, historical
development, cultural blending, and cross-hybridization. S PRIN G. [3]
MUSL 2150. Music, Identity, and Diversity. [Formerly MUSL 261]
Issues of multiculturalism and intersections with musical expression in
A merica. Cultural determinants, such as race, gender, ethnicity, class,
religion, language, ideology, folklore, and history will be studied critically. Prerequisite: A ny MUSL course or A MER 1002. FALL . [3]
MUSL 2200W. Music in Western Culture. [Formerly MUSL 121W]
A n overview of music in the Western art tradition, including its basic
historical periods, styles, genres and disciplines. T angible applications
of historical, analytical, and cultural thinking to musical performance.
Guided discussion, varied writing assignments, and presentations.
Prerequisite: Open to B.Mus. students, declared music minors/second majors, or with demonstrated musical literacy and permission of
instructor. S PRIN G. [3] Musicology faculty.
MUSL 2310. The Bible and Music. [Formerly MUSL 219] A n investigation of Biblical texts (Old T estament/T anach; D euterocanonical texts/
Old T estament A pocrypha; N ew T estament) that have inspired musical

B

272
settings and the musical settings themselves. Emphasis on literary
and musical analysis and interpretation. N o musical or scriptural background assumed. FALL . [3] R ose and L evine.
MUSL 2320. Exploring the Film Soundtrack. [Formerly MUSL 264]
R elationships among soundtrack, image, and narrative in film. T he
complex of music, sound, and dialog in a variety of A merican films,
from silents to Hollywood blockbusters and cartoons. T opics include
diegesis, temporality, continuity, and musical style. D iscussion, video,
and film research, reading, and listening. N o musical background
required. S PRIN G. [3] L ink.
MUSL 2330. Words and Music. [Formerly MUSL 218] A n investigation of works of literature that have inspired musical settings and the
musical settings themselves. Emphasis on literary and musical analysis
and interpretation. N o musical background assumed. R epeat credit for
students who have completed EN GL 3736. [3] Michael R ose and Mark
Jarman, Professor of English. (S pring)
MUSL 2600. American Music. [Formerly MUSL 147] A history of music
in the U nited S tates, 1620 to the present. D istinctly A merican musical
traditions such as shape-notes, minstrelsy, jazz, twentieth-century syntheses. R ecommended: MUSL 2200W or 1200, or music-reading skills
sufficient to follow a score. FALL . [3] L ovensheimer.
MUSL 2610. Music of the South. [Formerly MUSL 262] T he musical
riches of the A merican S outh approached from various perspectives,
including the historical, cultural, social, political, and religious. Blues,
country, and gospel are the primary genres of study; jazz, folk, and
classical traditions in the S outh also receive attention. Prerequisite: A ny
MUSL course or A MER 1002. FALL . [3] Fry. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 2620. DIY Movements: Hip Hop, Punk, and the Democratization of America’s Pop. A n exploration of the history, continuation,
and aesthetics of the DIY music movement in the U nited S tates and
abroad. A historical approach will be used, with an emphasis on important styles, artists, and social and cultural issues. S tudents will gain an
understanding of hip hop and punk as musical and performative forms,
how they are created, how they are interpreted, and how they are a
direct expression of the cultural context in which they are produced.
Prerequisite: A ny MUSL course. [3] Fry.
MUSL 3100. Music of the 20th and 21st Centuries. [Formerly MUSL
239] A n exploration of the wealth and diversity of European and A merican art music since 1900. Emphasis on the historical, cultural, philosophical, and technological contexts that encourage an approach to
this music on its own terms. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second
majors, MUSL 2200W and 2100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200;
or permission of instructor. FALL . [3] Calico, L ovensheimer.
MUSL 3150. Music, Gender, and Sexuality. [Formerly MUSL 201]
Exploration of gender and sexuality in Western art and vernacular musical traditions. T opics include gendered musical forms, genres, and performance; feminist music criticism; ideologies of musical authorship
and genius; musical canons; and musical representations of gender
and sexuality. Prerequisite: MUSL 2200W or 1200 and ability to read a
score. S PRIN G. [3] L owe. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 3155. Women and Music. [Formerly MUSL 200] A n investigation of the roles women have played in the development of Western
music - performance, composition, patronage, education -and the
social and economic factors that have influenced their position. R ecommended: MUSL 2200W, 1200, or familiarity with the style periods of
classical Western music. [3] Cyrus. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 3160. Women and Rock Music. [Formerly MUSL 253] A n
exploration of the ways that women have made their voices heard in
rock on stage, in the studio, behind the scenes, and as fans. Prerequisite: A ny MUSL or WGS course. S PRIN G. [3] Gunderman.
MUSL 3213. Artist, Community, and Democracy. Communities of
diverse artists, minority viewpoints, and cultural pluralism in a democratic society. Contemporary U nited S tates with cross-cultural and historical comparisons. [3]

vanderbilt university
MUSL 3220. Opera in the 17th and 18th Centuries. [Formerly MUSL
221A ] In-depth study of five or six representative works. S core and
libretto analysis, reception history, cult of the performer, role of the
contemporary producer-director. B.Mus. students and second majors,
MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200;
or permission of instructor. N ot open to students who completed MUSL
221 prior to fall 2011. FALL . [3] Calico.
MUSL 3221. Opera in the 19th Century. [Formerly MUSL 221B] Indepth study of five or six representative works. S core and libretto analysis,
reception history, cult of the performer, role of the contemporary producerdirector. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second majors, MUSL 2200W,
2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of
instructor. S erves as repeat credit for MUSL 221. FALL . [3] Calico.
MUSL 3222. Mahler Symphonies: Songs of Irony. [Formerly MUSL
222] A n exploration of large orchestral works of Gustav Mahler emphasizing their demonstration of the synthesis of symphony and song and
their reflection of nineteenth-century German philosophies of irony.
Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second majors, MUSL 2200W,
2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of
instructor. FALL . [3] L ovensheimer.
MUSL 3223. Music in the Age of Beethoven and Schubert. [Formerly
MUSL 223] T he musical legacy of each composer in culture and (especially) social context: patrons, family, and friends. Prerequisite: B.Mus.
students and second majors, MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music
minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. FALL . [3]
Cyrus, L owe, S hadle. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 3224. Haydn and Mozart. [Formerly MUSL 224] A n in-depth
look at the music of Haydn and Mozart in cultural and social contexts.
Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second majors, MUSL 2200W, 2100,
and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of
instructor. FALL . [3] L owe.
MUSL 3225. Brahms and the Anxiety of Influence. [Formerly MUSL
225] A study of Brahms’ large-scale orchestral works and other selected
literature from the perspective of ‘influence.’ Musical relationships
to Couperin, J. S . Bach and sons, Beethoven, Wagner, S choenberg
and others. T opics include Brahms’ self-image; Brahms as conductor,
performer and editor; stylistic fingerprints; popular and folk elements;
Brahms and later composers; his relationship to Clara; the WagnerBrahms debate. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second majors,
MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 2100;
or permission of instructor. FALL . [3] Cyrus. (Offered alternate years)
MUSL 3226. The String Quartet. [Formerly MUSL 226] A n intensive
exploration of the string quartet. T opics for discussion include origins
and history of the genre, rhetoric, audience, reception, interpretation,
and performance practice. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second
majors, MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or
1200; or permission of instructor. FALL . [3] L owe.
MUSL 3227. Music in the Age of Revolution, 1789-1848. [Formerly
MUSL 227] Explores developments in genres, styles, patronage, and
careers brought on by socioeconomic and political change from late
Haydn to Wagner. T opics include nationalism, R omanticism, rise of the
middle class, touring virtuoso, composer/critic. Musical analysis, historical and cultural context. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second
majors, MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or
1200; or permission of instructor. FALL . [3] Calico, S hadle.
MUSL 3228. J.S. Bach: L earned Musician & V irtual T raveler. [Formerly
MUSL 228] Explores the life and works of high baroque composer
J.S . Bach, who developed a highly cosmopolitan, erudite musical
style. Course will include structural and stylistic analysis and will also
address biography, cultural context, and performance practice. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second majors, MUSL 2200W, 2100, and
3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor.
S PRIN G. [3] L owe.
MUSL 3229. Robert Schumann and the Romantic Sensibility. [Formerly MUSL 229] A n exploration of R obert S chumann’s music and criticism within the context of German R omanticism. B.Mus. students and

Blair School of Music / Courses
second majors, MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL
2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. FALL . [3] L ovensheimer.
MUSL 3230. Music and the Construction of National Identity. [Formerly MUSL 230]Music and the Construction of N ational Identity. [Formerly MUSL 230] A n in-depth exploration of the tools used to construct
national musical identities during the long nineteenth century (ca.
1789-1914), including compositional style, performance techniques,
and music criticism. A ddresses topics from Western Europe, Eastern
Europe, and the A mericas. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second
majors: MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors: MUSL 1200 or
2200W; or permission of instructor. S PRIN G. [3] S hadle.
MUSL 3231. The Art of Program Music: Tone Painting and Symphonic Poetry. A n in-depth exploration of the style, philosophical basis,
and possible meanings of program music, broadly defined. Examples
will be taken from the sixteenth century to the present with a focus on
the long nineteenth century (1789-1914). Prerequisite: B.Mus. students
and second majors: MUSL 2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors:
MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. [3] S hadle.
MUSL 3232. God, Sex, and Politics in Early Music. A n exploration
of the intersecting topics of religious practice, love and sexuality, and
power structures in early music. S tudents will gain familiarity with many
of the major currents, cultures, composers, and contexts of Western
European music from ca. 1100-1650. In addition to the primary themes
of the course, we will entertain such other musically relevant topics as
mathematics, early music theory, mysticism, the role of women in early
music, the development of notation, and questions of performance and
interpretation. Prerequisite: B.Mus. students and second majors, MUSL
2200W, 2100, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. [3] L owe.
MUSL 3810. Academic Research and Writing in Music. [Formerly
MUSL 288] Intensive development of a musicology research project
already in progress (such as a term paper, grant proposal, etc.). Focus on
research methods in musicology and effective academic writing. Instruction centers on peer review and editing, guided research, and analysis of
research, writing, and editing processes. S tudents will also develop an
academic curriculum vita. Projects must be approved by the instructor
before students register. Prerequisite: MUSL 2200W or permission of
the instructor. May be repeated once for credit. [3] (N ot currently offered)
MUSL 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly MUSL 289] D evelopment
and execution of a program of study in musicology or ethnomusicology
under the direction of a member of the department. (S ee A cademic
R egulations section.) [R epeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per
semester] Musicology faculty.
MUSL 3890. Selected Topics in Music History. [Formerly MUSL
294] S elected methodological approaches focused on a particular
topic. Offerings have included “Music and the A merican Presidency,”
“S choenberg and the Word,” “Mingus, Monk, and Miles: Jazz Biography
and Jazz Composition,” “S tephen S ondheim and the A merican Musical,” and “Mozart Piano Concertos.” Prerequisite: V aries by topic. May
be repeated for credit when topics vary. [3] Musicology faculty.
MUSL 4978. Senior Thesis. [Formerly MUSL 298] Completion of an
extended paper based in musicological or ethnomusicological research
under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Progress monitored via tutorials. Open only to seniors. Prerequisite: MUSL 3100. [V ariable credit,
1-3 hours each semester; may be repeated once] Musicology faculty.
MUSL 4998. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly MUSL 299A ] Independent research on a musicological or ethnomusicological topic, culminating in a written thesis submitted to the faculty. Progress monitored
via tutorials. S tudents completing this course with distinction, including a thesis and an oral defense, will earn honors or highest honors in
music literature and history. Open only to students in the department
honors program. Prerequisite: D epartmental approval of formal prospectus. [3] Musicology faculty.
MUSL 4999. Senior Honors Thesis. [Formerly MUSL 299B] Independent research on a musicological or ethnomusicological topic, culminating in a written thesis submitted to the faculty. Progress monitored

273
via tutorials. S tudents completing this course with distinction, including a thesis and an oral defense, will earn honors or highest honors in
music literature and history. Open only to students in the department
honors program. Prerequisite: D epartmental approval of formal prospectus. [3] Musicology faculty.

MUS O: Other Music Courses
MUSO 1000. Recital Attendance. [Formerly MUS O 108] Weekly recitals in solo and chamber music settings, presented by students enrolled
for performance instruction, and six additional faculty/student recitals
and concerts. R equired of all music degree (B.Mus.) students. (S ee
A cademic R egulations section of Catalog.) Offered on a pass/fail basis.
[0] Melissa R ose.
MUSO 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly MUS O 099] Open to firstyear students of all four undergraduate schools. T opics approved by
Blair faculty. S tudents may propose topics through the associate dean.
N o credit toward a major or minor in music. General elective credit only.
FALL , S PRIN G. [1] S taff.
MUSO 1120. Brass Seminar. [Formerly MUS O 152] Fundamentals of
brass playing; an overview of basic techniques. A n in-depth study of
non-traditional notation, performance practice, and ensemble rehearsal
techniques. R equired of all brass performance majors. Open only to
music majors. S PRIN G. [1] Wilson.
MUSO 1130. Percussion Seminar. [Formerly MUS O 153] Overview of
percussion in Western and non-Western cultures from pre-history to
present. Emphasis on European/A merican orchestral practices. R epresentative works for study chosen from symphony, opera, oratorio, and
other orchestral/choral sources. FALL . [1] Jung.
MUSO 1201. Lyric Theatre Workshop I. [Formerly MUS O 104A ] Introduction to the various performance elements of the lyric theatre experience: acting, movement, improvisation, use of the voice, stage combat,
and scene study. Open to all V anderbilt students by consent of instructor. S PRIN G. [1] S hay.
MUSO 1202. Lyric Theatre Workshop II. [Formerly MUS O 104B]
V arious performance elements of the lyric theatre experience: acting,
movement, improvisation, use of the voice, stage combat, and scene
study. Prerequisite: MUS O 1201. S PRIN G. [1] S hay.
MUSO 1203. Lyric Theatre Workshop for Instrumentalists. [Formerly MUS O 104C] Beginning acting and movement techniques for the
lyric stage as they pertain to instrumental musicians. Memorized texts,
acting improvisation, and stage movement are explored to gain better
connection to the music, fellow collaborators, and the audience. A pplication to individual instrumental repertoire required. Open by consent
of instructor. S PRIN G. [1] S hay.
MUSO 1210. Baroque Performance for Strings. [Formerly MUS O
117] A spects of period instrument performance adaptable to modern
instruments and modern bows. A rticulation, ornamentation, the rule of
the down-bow, the influence of dance, and other technical and stylistic
issues. Baroque bow provided. Culminates in a lecture-performance.
May be repeated for credit. [1] (N ot currently offered)
MUSO 1220. Jazz Improvisation I: The Blues. [Formerly MUS O 131]
Introduction to the techniques of jazz improvisation. D evelopment of
basic performing techniques in various styles. Prerequisite: MU KH
1131. May be repeated for credit. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] Middagh, S pencer.
MUSO 1221. Jazz improvisation II: The Great American Songbook.
Intermediate study techniques for jazz improvisation. In-depth study of
rhythm changes, the Great American S ongbook, and jazz standards. Introduction to re-harmonization techniques. Prerequisite: MUS O 1220. [1]
MUSO 1222. Jazz Improvisation III: Post-bop and Beyond. A dvanced
study in techniques for jazz improvisation. In-depth study of contemporary jazz compositions, structured- and free-forms, and original student
compositions. Prerequisite: MUS O 1220 and MUS O 1221. [1]

B

274
MUSO 1230. Advanced Lyric Writing for Songwriters. D esigned to
help students find their unique voice as lyricists through lecture, reading, exercises, discussion, and lyric analysis. D esigned for songwriters
with experience in song form, rhyme and rhyme scheme, and lyrical
rhythm. D oes not count toward a major or minor in music. Prerequisite:
MUT H 1125, or permission of instructor. [1] Blackmon.
MUSO 1300. Music and the Fall of Segregation. [Formerly MUS O
154] A study of how music, specifically swing and jazz from the 1930s
and '40s, rock & roll and rhythm & blues in the 1950s, and soul music in
the 1960s, impacted segregation and the Civil R ights Movement. Case
studies and personal reflections from the perspective of a studio musician, record producer, and record company executive. Films, recordings, and oral histories of artists and producers. FALL , S PRIN G. [3] (N ot
currently offered)

vanderbilt university
MUSO 3020. Vanderbilt Music Académie. [Formerly MUS O 232]
Holistic approach to intensive performance study through cultural
immersion in residence with V anderbilt in France in A ix-en-Provence.
L arge ensemble, chamber music, master classes, private instruction
with performances and public coachings each week. A rtistic introspection and cultural exploration through French classes, excursions, and
activities. SU MMER . [2] V errier.
MUSO 3100. Music and Cognition. T heories and research about the
cognition of music, appreciation, and performance. S elected musical topics include timbre, consonance, dissonance, tuning, melody,
rhythm, scales, modes, chords, and composition. Concepts and
research from the psychological sciences emphasize sensory mechanisms, perceptual discriminations, pattern recognition, categorization,
transfer of learning, and motor coordination. Prerequisite: One course
in music or psychology. [3] Bingham.

MUSO 1340. Technology for Musicians. A n introduction to musicrelated computer technology essential to the contemporary musician,
including computer music notation and the basic principles of MIDI /
audio recording in a digital audio workstation. Prerequisite: B.Mus.
students and declared music minors/second majors, or permission of
instructor; corequisite for B.Mus. students: MUT H 2100. [1] S alazar.

MUSO 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly MUS O 289] D evelopment
of a project or a program of reading under the direction of a faculty
sponsor. Consent of the faculty sponsor is required. (S ee A cademic
R egulations section.) [R epeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per
semester] S taff.

MUSO 1342. Fundamentals of Digital Audio. A n introduction to the
fundamental concepts of using a D igital A udio Workstation, including
sequencing MIDI , recording and editing audio, and mixing full songs.
Prerequisite: MUS O 1340 or permission of instructor. [1] S alazar.

MUSO 3970. Junior Recital. [Formerly MUSR 295] S tudents are
encouraged to prepare a joint recital, shared with another degree candidate. S ee Blair A cademic R egulations section of the U ndergraduate
Catalog for detailed requirements. Open by permission of instructor. [1]

MUSO 1350. Computer Recording Technology Seminar. [Formerly
MUS O 102] T he digital recording revolution. R ecording, editing, and
mixing music, using both audio and MIDI sequencing data inside the
computer. R emixing techniques with universal plug-in software. S ampling, synthesis, and dissection of studio projects. FALL , S PRIN G. [2]
Wilder. (N ot currently offered)

MUSO 4970. Senior Recital. [Formerly MUSR 299] S ee Blair A cademic R egulations section of the U ndergraduate Catalog for detailed
requirements. Open by permission of instructor. [1]

MUSO 1400. Diction for Singers: English and Italian. [Formerly
MUS O 159] A n introduction to the International Phonetic A lphabet as
applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL . [1] Montgomery.
MUSO 1410. Diction for Singers: German. [Formerly MUS O 159C] High
German diction, using the International Phonetic A lphabet. Prerequisite:
MUS O 1400 or permission of the instructor. S PRIN G. [1] Montgomery.
MUSO 1420. Diction for Singers: French. [Formerly MUS O 159D ]
French stage diction, using the International Phonetic A lphabet. Prerequisite: MUS O 1400 or permission of the instructor. FALL . [1] Montgomery.
MUSO 2100. Music Criticism and Writing. [Formerly MUS O 200]
A practical guide to writing professional music criticism. R eadings
include selected writings of the great critics, literary authors, program
annotators and bloggers. A ssignments involve listening exercises, written reviews and program notes. D ifference in style among classical,
jazz and rock critics will be considered. Prerequisite: MUSL 2200W
and MUSL 2100, or permission of instructor. FALL . [2] Pitcher.

MUSO 4972. Jazz Concentration Recital. S ee Blair A cademic regulations section of the U ndergraduate Catalog for detailed requirements.
Open by permission of instructor. [1]

MUT H: Music T heory
MUTH 1120. Songwriting and Elements of Music Theory. [Formerly MUS C 100] Introduction to fundamental elements of music as
they apply to popular songwriting techniques. S elected readings on
the technical and aesthetic facets of songwriting. L istening analysis
and discussion of songs in a variety of current styles. S elected aural
skills as they relate to the songwriter’s craft. Class visits by successful songwriters. D esigned for students with little or no technical training in music. D oes not count toward a major or minor in music. FALL ,
S PRIN G. [3] Walker.

MUSO 2200. The Movement of Line. By examining in detail interrelated examples from calligraphy, drawing, verse, and music, this
course seeks to discover common elements of concept and construction in diverse forms of linear movement. S ophomore standing and an
ability to read a single line of music required. [3] Carl S mith.

MUTH 1125. Songwriting II. [Formerly MUS C 102] Project-based
class designed to refine and advance skills developed in MUT H 1120.
Focuses on effective musical and lyrical thematic treatment. Extensive
study of rewriting techniques; frequent performances of student compositions. S elected readings on the technical and aesthetic facets of
songwriting. L istening, analysis, and discussion of songs in a variety of
current styles. Occasional Monday night sessions with guest songwriters and experts in the field. D oes not count toward a major or minor
in music. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisite: MUT H 1120.
FALL , S PRIN G. [3] Walker.

MUSO 3000. Collaborative Composition in London. [Formerly MUS O
230] Exchange program with the R oyal A cademy of Music, L ondon.
Collaborative workshop between student composers and performers
at both schools, with faculty mentorship. T ravel to L ondon over spring
break (vouchers available), hosting of RA M students at Blair the following week. Enrollment by audition. S PRIN G. [1] Michael R ose and Peter
S heppard S kaerved (RA M). (Offered alternate years)

MUTH 1130. Nashville Number System for Songwriters/Performers.
[Formerly MUS C 104] Designed for songwriters and practitioners who
may not read traditional music. Introduction to intervals, major and minor
scales, chords and chord extensions, inversions, time signatures, note
values, the N ashville N umber S ystem, song forms, charting original songs
and classic hits. Includes observation and discussion of studio work.
Does not count toward major or minor in music. FALL . [1] Blackmon.

MUSO 3010. Performance in Practice, IES Vienna. [Formerly MUS O
231] Open by audition to students in the IES V ienna program. T he
workshop is designed to offer vocalists and instrumentalists the opportunity to expand repertoire and enhance performance skills. R ehearsal
and discussion of aspects of selected works in relation to the challenge
of performance. May be repeated once for credit. [2] S taff.

MUTH 1135. Mozart. [Formerly MUS C 118] T he music of Wolfgang
A madeus Mozart. T echniques for listening to different genres of classical music. Emphasis on style and structure, music theory and history, and Mozart’s life and character. N o musical background assumed.
D oes not count toward major or minor in music. S PRIN G. [3] Bingham.
(N ot currently offered)

Blair School of Music / Courses
MUTH 1200. Survey of Music Theory. [Formerly MUS C 120A ] Presents 18th- to 20th-century harmonic practice. D esigned to develop
music theory skills through written exercises of figured and unfigured
basses; harmonization of melodies; and study of ear training, using
sight-singing exercises and melodic and harmonic dictation. N ot open
to students who have completed MUT H 2100 or 2200. D oes not count
toward a major in music. [3] Bingham.
MUTH 1210. Survey of Music Theory. [Formerly MUS C 120B] Presents 18th- to 20th-century harmonic practice. D esigned to develop
music theory skills through written exercises of figured and unfigured
basses; harmonization of melodies; and study of ear training, using
sightsinging exercises and melodic and harmonic dictation. Prerequisite: MUT H 1200. N ot open to students who have completed MUT H
2100 or 2200. D oes not count toward a major in music. [3] Bingham.
MUTH 2100. The Syntax of Music. [Formerly MUS C 170] Basic elements of music and notation (including computer notation), introduced
through a wide variety of styles. Includes non-tonal and non-Western
repertoire. R einforcement of the elements of MUS C 2100/Musicianship
L evel I throughout. B.Mus. students enrolled in MUT H 2100 should also
be enrolled in MUS O 1340. Corequisite: MUS C 2100. FALL . [2] D eakin,
S layton, Carl S mith.
MUTH 2200. Harmonic Idioms of the Common Practice Period.
[Formerly MUS C 171] Principles of harmonic progression in the context of music from the common practice period. Includes figured bass
realization, harmonization, analysis, composition, contrapuntal idioms,
modulation. Prerequisite: B- or above in MUT H 2100; corequisite:
MUS C 2200. S PRIN G. [3] Kurek, Michael R ose, Carl S mith, S layton.
MUTH 2300. Repertoire Analysis. [Formerly MUS C 172] A study
of diverse and interrelated harmonic, melodic, rhythmic, and structural aspects of the musical repertoire from the common practice era.
A pproaches to understanding various historical styles through composition and through analysis and interpretation of representative works
from each era. Includes study of invention and fugue. Prerequisite: Cor above in MUT H 2200; corequisite: MUS C 2300. FALL . [3] Michael
R ose, Kurek, L ink, S layton.
MUTH 2400. Musical Expansion: the Twentieth Century to the Present. [Formerly MUS C 173] L ate-R omantic, modernist, and postmodern
compositional practices, including freely chromatic and non-functional
harmony, ordered and unordered sets, post-tonal formal design, contemporary rhythmic devices, indeterminacy, and quotation. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUT H 2300; corequisite: MUS C 2400. S PRIN G. [3]
L ink, Kurek, Michael R ose, S layton.
MUTH 3100. Individual Theory Instruction (Elective). [Formerly
MUS C 227] Individual instruction and seminars. S core analysis and
style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUT H 2400 and consent of
instructor. May be repeated for credit. [V ariable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.
MUTH 3110. Orchestration. [Formerly MUS C 224] T echnical and
aesthetic considerations in composing or transcribing for individual
orchestral instruments, sections, and full orchestra. S core analysis
and composition projects. Prerequisite: B- or above in MUT H 2100.
S PRIN G. [3] Kurek.
MUTH 3120. Jazz Theory. [Formerly MUS C 248] A n exploration of harmonic syntax, melodic construction, and song forms in jazz. Includes
analysis, directed listening, and practice hearing jazz chords and chord
progressions. Prerequisite: MUT H 1210, or MUT H 2200/MUS C 2200.
R ecommended: MUS O 1220. S PRIN G. [2] Middagh.

275
through study of historical performance styles. Emphasis on application of these interpretive skills to live performance. Prerequisite: MUT H
2200. FALL . [3] Carl S mith.
MUTH 3150. Early Keyboard Literature. [Formerly MUS C 255] Keyboard music from the late fifteenth to the early eighteenth century.
Compositional techniques and performance practices; study of period
instruments; literature for clavichord, harpsichord, organ, and fortepiano. FALL . [2] Carl S mith. (Offered alternate years)
MUTH 3160. Counterpoint: 16th Century Principles. [Formerly
MUS C 261] T echniques for handling independent musical lines according to sixteenth-century principles. S pecies counterpoint in two voices,
composition in three and four voices, and in non-modal and freely tonal
styles, but not high Baroque style. Prerequisite: MUT H 2200. S PRIN G.
[3] Carl S mith. (Offered alternate years)
MUTH 3170. Techniques of Composing for Media. T echniques for
effective composing for media such as film, television, games, and
Internet, including composing with virtual instruments, digital audio
mixing and synchronizing to video. Creation of a 5-7 minute original
sound track or film composing demo reel. Prerequisite: COMP 1100 or
MUT H 2400 or permission of instructor. FALL . [2] Kurek.
MUTH 3200. Chromatic Harmony in the Romantic Era. [Formerly
MUS C 226] Intensive analysis of challenging standard repertoire by
three generations of R omantic composers, whose ingenious extensions of Classic period strategies of tonal organization require interpretive tools beyond the scope of the core theory curriculum. Investigation
of both large and small forms. Focus on relationships between harmonic and structural symmetries. Prerequisite: MUT H 2400. [3] Michael
R ose. (Offered alternate years)
MUTH 3210. Post-tonal Analysis. [Formerly MUS C 225] Exploration of
the post-tonal analytical techniques through intensive study of selected
works of composers from the early 20th century to the present, including D ebussy, S criabin, S choenberg, Berg, Webern, S travinsky, Copland, D allapiccola, Boulez, Cage, Berio, Feldman, L achenmann. Prerequisite: MUT H 2400. S PRIN G. [2] S layton. (Offered alternate years)
MUTH 3220. Musical Explorations: Bartók. [Formerly MUS C 280]
Indepth study of the life and music of Béla Bartók; includes detailed
investigation of salient theoretical concepts, formal structures, and the
composer’s integration of various regional folk musics into his own works.
Prerequisite: MUT H 2400 or permission of instructor. S PRIN G. [2] S layton.
MUTH 3890. Special Topics in Music Theory. [Formerly MUS C 294]
A dvanced study in theory, focused on various topics from year to year,
including such areas as advanced counterpoint, analysis of a specific
composer, S chenkerian analysis, etc. Prerequisite: V aries by topic. [2
or 3, as listed] Kurek, L ink, Michael R ose, S layton, Carl S mith.

MWEL : Musicians’ Wellness
MWEL 1120. The Alexander Technique I. [Formerly MUS O 162A ] A n
accurate kinesthetic sense of the structure and movement of the body
through hands-on and verbal instruction in body mapping and the principles developed by F. M. A lexander. Emphasis on ordinary daily activities. Offered on a pass/fail basis only. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] A hner.
MWEL 1121. The Alexander Technique II. [Formerly MUS O 162B]
Further exploration of the principles of the technique applied to daily
activities and developmental movement. Emphasis on individual experiences within the context of the class. Offered on a pass/fail basis only.
Prerequisite: MWEL 1120. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] A hner.

MUTH 3130. Techniques of Choral Composition. [Formerly MUS C
223] T echnical and aesthetic considerations involved in arranging and
composing for combinations of voices, from two-part to larger choral ensembles, accompanied and unaccompanied. S core analysis and
composition projects. Prerequisite: MUT H 2200 or consent of instructor. S PRIN G. [3] Carl S mith. (Offered alternate years)

MWEL 1130. Meditation for Musicians. [Formerly MUS O 164] A practice-centered approach helps students develop a regular meditation routine. Each weekly session involves meditation, in-class reading, listening, and performance. Prerequisite: Open to music majors and minors.
Offered on a pass/fail basis. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] Joshua McGuire.

MUTH 3140. Historical Traditions in Composition and in Performance. [Formerly MUS C 251] T opical approach to historical performance traditions, 1610-1897, addressed through musical analysis and

MWEL 1140. Tai Chi for Musicians. [Formerly MUS O 165] Principles
of T ai Chi applied to musical performance. T he practice and understanding of anatomical movement, with emphasis on prevention of
injury. Offered on a pass/fail basis. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] Phillips.

B

276
MWEL 2120. The Performer and the Body. [Formerly MUS O 163]
A pplication of the A lexander technique in a small group setting with
attention to individuals and their particular performance modes, i.e.,
public speaking, singing, dancing, acting, playing an instrument.
Offered on a passfail basis. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisite: MWEL 1120. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] A hner.

Group Performance Instruction
FDDL 1010. Introduction to Fiddle I. [Formerly MUS P 107A] Designed for
those with no experience in fiddle playing. T echnical, stylistic, and historical elements involved in fiddling, as well as basic notation and idiomatic
techniques. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1] Combs, Plohman.
GTR 1010. Introduction to Guitar I. [Formerly MUS P 104A ] A foundation in basic guitar technique that will prepare students for future studies in classical, jazz, or popular styles of guitar. Emphasis on chordal
accompaniment, development of reading skills, improvisational techniques with melodies and chords. One 50-minute group lesson weekly.
Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1] Phillips.
GTR 1020. Introduction to Guitar II. [Formerly MUS P 104B] A foundation in basic guitar technique that will prepare students for future studies in classical, jazz, or popular styles of guitar. Emphasis on chordal
accompaniment, development of reading skills, improvisational techniques with melodies and chords. One 50-minute group lesson weekly.
Prerequisite: GTR 1010 or permission of instructor. Fees apply to
non-B.Mus. students. [1] Phillips.
PERC 1010. Introduction to Percussion. [Formerly MUS P 105A ]
Basic percussion techniques with emphasis on rolls, embellishments,
sticking combinations, and their applications for concert and popular musical styles. Prerequisite: Previous musical experience and an
understanding of notation. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Fees
apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1] Wiggins.
PIAN 1010. Introduction to Piano I. [Formerly MUS P 102A ] A totalmusicianship approach to the piano. R epertoire, technique, and sight
reading are studied. A lso includes the study of transposition, harmonization, and improvisation. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Fees
apply. N ot open to B.Mus. students. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] Wade.
PIAN 1020. Introduction to Piano II. [Formerly MUS P 102B] A totalmusicianship approach to the piano. R epertoire, technique, and sight
reading are studied. A lso includes the study of transposition, harmonization, and improvisation. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Prerequisite: PIAN 1010 or permission of instructor. Fees apply. N ot open to
B.Mus. students. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] Wade.
STPN 1010. Introduction to Steel Pan/Drum. [Formerly MUS P 109A ]
D esigned for those with no experience in playing steel pan/drum. A
foundation of basic techniques, Caribbean song styles (Calypso, S oca,
R eggae), history and development of the steel band art form, and cultural awareness. One 60-minute group lesson weekly. Fees apply to
non-B.Mus. students. FALL , S PRIN G, SU MMER . [1] Britain.
VLA 1010. Viola for Violinists. [Formerly MUS O 116] T echnical principles, practices, and strategies for violinists learning viola. Investigation
of solo and chamber music repertoire; historical evolution of the viola.
V iola provided. Prerequisite: A pproval of violin instructor and course
instructor. FALL , S PRIN G. [1] Plummer.

Individual Performance Instruction
Courses are repeatable. Students may accrue up to 4 credit hours per
semester of enrollment.
BASS 1100. Double Bass (elective/ minors/ second majors). [Formerly MUS P 185] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm,
interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees
apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] R eist, Wanner.

vanderbilt university
BASS 2100. Double Bass (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUS P 185] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts
majors. [2] R eist, Wanner.
BASS 2200. Double Bass (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUSR 185] Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and
sophomore performance majors. [4] R eist, Wanner.
BASS 4100. Double Bass (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUS P 285] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2]
R eist, Wanner.
BASS 4200. Double Bass (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors).
[Formerly MUSR 285] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior
performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] R eist, Wanner.
BNJO 1100. Banjo. [Formerly MUS P 197] Individual instruction
focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on
tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for
elective credit. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Brown.
BRQ 1100. Baroque Strings. Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of Baroque violin, viola, cello, or bass, with emphasis on
tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. [1-2]
BSSN 1100. Bassoon (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly
MUS P 175] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply
to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Kolkay.
BSSN 2100. Bassoon (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUS P 175] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of
the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] Kolkay.
BSSN 2200. Bassoon (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUSR 175] Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and
sophomore performance majors. [4] Kolkay.
BSSN 4100. Bassoon (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
275] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Kolkay.
BSSN 4200. Bassoon (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUSR 275] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm,
interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional
hearing. [4] Kolkay.
CLAR 1100. Clarinet (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly
MUS P 173] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply
to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Jackson, L ee.
CLAR 2100. Clarinet (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUS P 173] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm,

Blair School of Music / Courses
interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors.
[2] Jackson.
CLAR 2200. Clarinet (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 173] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] Jackson.
CLAR 4100. Clarinet (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
273] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Jackson.
CLAR 4200. Clarinet (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUSR 273] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm,
interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional
hearing. [4] Jackson.
CLLO 1100. Cello (elective credit and General Music Minors). [Formerly MUS P 184] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of
the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to
non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length
and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Cassel, Mansell, Wang.
CLLO 2100. Cello (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 184] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] Wang.
CLLO 2200. Cello (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 184] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] Wang.
CLLO 4100. Cello (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
284] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Wang.
CLLO 4200. Cello (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 284] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.
Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Wang.
DLCM 1100. Dulcimer. [Formerly MUS P 194] Individual instruction
focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone
quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours,
based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] R owe.
DRUM 1100. Drumset (elective credit). [Formerly MUS P 180A ] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument,
with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and
literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus.
students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] D . Phillips.
EUPH 1100. Euphonium (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly
MUS P 190] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply
to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] L ong.
EUPH 2100. Euphonium (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUS P 190] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts
majors. [2] L ong.

277
EUPH 2200. Euphonium (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUSR 190] Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and
sophomore performance majors. [4] L ong.
EUPH 4100. Euphonium (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUS P 290] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] L ong.
EUPH 4200. Euphonium (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors).
[Formerly MUSR 290] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior
performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] L ong.
FDDL 1100. Fiddle. [Formerly MUS P 192] Individual instruction
focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on
tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for
elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit
hours, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Combs, Plohman.
FLUT 1100. Flute (elective/music minors/2nd majors). [Formerly
MUS P 171] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply
to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Fagan, D unnavant.
FLUT 2100. Flute (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 171] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] Fagan.
FLUT 2200. Flute (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 171] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] Fagan.
FLUT 4100. Flute (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
271] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Fagan.
FLUT 4200. Flute (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 271] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.
Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Fagan.
GTR 1030. Fingerboard Harmony. [Formerly MUS O 114] Individual
instruction in advanced guitar skills: modal positions, modal patterns,
score reading, arpeggios, transposition, and chord progressions. Fees
apply to non-B.Mus. students. Prerequisite: GTR 1020 or permission of
instructor. FALL , S PRIN G. [1-2 variable hours, based on lesson length
as agreed on with instructor] Phillips.
GTR 1100. Guitar (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
188] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] T odd, Phillips.
GTR 2100. Guitar (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 188] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] T odd.
GTR 2200. Guitar (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 188] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,

B

278

vanderbilt university

rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] T odd.

hours, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Brecht, S mith.

GTR 4100. Guitar (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
288] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] T odd.

JAZZ 1100. Jazz Private Instruction. [Formerly MUS O 133] Private
instruction on standard jazz instruments and voice. R epertory and
techniques chosen to meet individual needs. Open by audition. Private lesson fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. May be repeated for
credit. FALL , S PRIN G. [V ariable credit: 1-2 each semester. Multiple
section enrollment possible. S tudents may accrue up to 6 credit hours
per semester of enrollment.] D udley, Watson, Kimbrough, D . Phillips,
S pencer.

GTR 4200. Guitar (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 288] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.
Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] T odd.
HARP 1100. Harp (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
181] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Copely.
HARP 2100. Harp (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 181] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] Copely.
HARP 2200. Harp (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 181] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] Copely.
HARP 4100. Harp (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
281] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Copely.
HARP 4200. Harp (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 281] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.
Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Copely.
HORN 1100. Horn (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
176] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] N orton.
HORN 2100. Horn (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 176] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] N orton.
HORN 2200. Horn (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 176] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] N orton.
HORN 4100. Horn (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
276] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] N orton.
HORN 4200. Horn (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 276] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.
Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] N orton.
HRPS 1100. Harpsichord. [Formerly MUS P 193] Individual instruction
focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone
quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students
by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students [1-2 variable credit

JAZZ 1150. Jazz and Commercial Arranging. Individual instruction in
jazz and commercial arranging, content ranging from lead sheet writing
to studio orchestra. R epertory and techniques chosen to meet individual needs. [1-2] Middagh.
MNDL 1100. Mandolin. [Formerly MUS P 195] Individual instruction
focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone
quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours,
based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Pearcy.
OBOE 1100. Oboe (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
172] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Hauser, Wiesmeyer.
OBOE 2100. Oboe (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 172] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] Hauser.
OBOE 2200. Oboe (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 172] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] Hauser.
OBOE 4100. Oboe (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
272] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Hauser.
OBOE 4200. Oboe (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 272] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.
Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Hauser.
ORGN 1100. Organ (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
187] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Brecht, S mith.
ORGN 2100. Organ (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 187] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] S mith.
ORGN 2200. Organ (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 187L ] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] S mith.
ORGN 4100. Organ (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
287] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] S mith.
ORGN 4200. Organ (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUSR 287] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice

Blair School of Music / Courses
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm,
interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional
hearing. [4] S mith.
PERC 1100. Percussion (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly
MUS P 180] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply
to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Jung, Wiggins.
PERC 2100. Percussion (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUS P 180] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of
the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus musical arts majors. [2] Jung.
PERC 2200. Percussion (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUSR 180] Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and
sophomore performance majors. [4] Jung.
PERC 4100. Percussion (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUS P 280] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. S pecialized study in drumset, jazz vibraphone or
contemporary marimba is available. Open only to musical arts juniors
and seniors; and for elective credit to percussion performance juniors
and seniors. [2] Jung.
PERC 4200. Percussion (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors).
[Formerly MUSR 280] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. S pecialized study in drumset, jazz
vibraphone or contemporary marimba is available. Open only to junior
and senior performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of
upper divisional hearing. [4] Jung.
PIAN 1100. Piano (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
186] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Conner, Coplan, D orfman,
Hwang, Krieger, Middleton, N ies, R eagan, Walker, Williams.
PIAN 2100. Piano (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 186] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2]
D orfman, Krieger, N ies.
PIAN 2200. Piano (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 186] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] D orfman, Krieger, N ies.
PIAN 4100. Piano (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
286] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] D orfman, Krieger, N ies.
PIAN 4200. Piano (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 286] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance
majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing.
[4] D orfman, Krieger, N ies.
RCRD 1100. Recorder (elective credit). [Formerly MUS P 196] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument,
with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and
literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students.

279
[1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and repertoire as
agreed on with instructor] (N ot currently offered)
SAX 1100. Saxophone (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly
MUS P 174] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply
to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] U tley.
SAX 2100. Saxophone (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUS P 174] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] U tley.
SAX 2200. Saxophone (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUSR 174] Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and
sophomore performance majors. [4] U tley.
SAX 4100. Saxophone (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
274] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] U tley.
SAX 4200. Saxophone (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUSR 274] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm,
interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional
hearing. [4] U tley.
STPN 1100. Steel Drum. [Formerly MUS P 198] Individual instruction
focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on
tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for
elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit
hours, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Britain.
TROM 1100. Trombone (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly
MUS P 178] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply
to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Barber, Wilson.
TROM 2100. Trombone (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUS P 178] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts
majors. [2] Wilson.
TROM 2200. Trombone (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUSR 178] Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and
sophomore performance majors. [4] Wilson.
TROM 4100. Trombone (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUS P 278] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2]
Wilson.
TROM 4200. Trombone (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors).
[Formerly MUSR 278] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior
performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Wilson.
TRPT 1100. Trumpet (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly
MUS P 177] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply

B

280

vanderbilt university

to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson
length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] S ibaja, Kunkee.

and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Kochanowski, Plummer.

TRPT 2100. Trumpet (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 177] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2] S ibaja.

VLA 4200. Viola (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 283] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance
majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing.
[4] Kochanowski, Plummer.

TRPT 2200. Trumpet (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly MUSR 177] Individual instruction focused on the art
and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and
sophomore performance majors. [4] S ibaja.
TRPT 4100. Trumpet (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
277] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] S ibaja.
TRPT 4200. Trumpet (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUSR 277] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice
of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm,
interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional
hearing. [4] S ibaja.
TUBA 1100. Tuba (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
179] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] L ong.
TUBA 2100. Tuba (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 179] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus musical arts majors. [2] L ong.
TUBA 2200. Tuba (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 179] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] L ong.
TUBA 4100. Tuba (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
279] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] L ong.
TUBA 4200. Tuba (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 279] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.
Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] L ong.
VLA 1100. Viola (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P 183]
Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument,
with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and repertoire
as agreed on with instructor] Kochanowski, Plummer, R einker.
VLA 2100. Viola (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 183] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2]
Kochanowski, Plummer.
VLA 2200. Viola (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 183] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] Kochanowski, Plummer.
VLA 4100. Viola (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
283] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,

VLN 1100. Violin (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
182] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length
and repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Blackwell, Heard, Huebl,
Miahky, McGann.
VLN 2100. Violin (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 182] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2]
Heard, Huebl, Miahky.
VLN 2200. Violin (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 182] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [4] Heard, Huebl, Miahky.
VLN 4100. Violin (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
282] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Heard,
Huebl, Miahky.
VLN 4200. Violin (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 282] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance
majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing.
[4] Heard, Huebl, Miahky.
VOIC 1100. Voice (elective/minor/second major). [Formerly MUS P
189] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. N ew students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.
Mus. students. [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and
repertoire as agreed on with instructor] Hewlett, Prentice.
VOIC 2100. Voice (Musical Arts Freshmen/Sophomores). [Formerly
MUS P 189] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. musical arts majors. [2]
Jarman, N elson, S hay.
VOIC 2200. Voice (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores).
[Formerly MUSR 189] Individual instruction focused on the art and
practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique,
rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors. [3] Jarman, N elson, S hay.
VOIC 4100. Voice (Musical Arts Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly MUS P
289] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation,
and literature. Open only to musical arts juniors and seniors. [2] Jarman,
N elson, S hay.
VOIC 4200. Voice (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors). [Formerly
MUSR 289] Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the
instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance
majors. Prerequisite: S uccessful completion of upper divisional hearing.
[4] Jarman, N elson, S hay.

Blair School of Music / Courses

Performance Classes
All courses are repeatable.

281
VOIC 1000. Voice Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 109F] Weekly
observation and participation. R equired of all voice majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] V oice faculty.

BASS 1000. Bass Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 109L ] Weekly
observation and participation. R equired of all bass majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] R eist, Wanner.
BSSN 1000. Bassoon Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 110E]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all bassoon majors,
performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Kolkay.
CLAR 1000. Clarinet Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 110F]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all clarinet majors,
performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Jackson.
CLLO 1000. Cello Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 109C]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all cello majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Wang.
FLUT 1000. Flute Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 109A ] Weekly
observation and participation. R equired of all flute majors, performance
and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Fagan.
GTR 1000. Guitar Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 109E] Weekly
observation and participation. R equired of all guitar majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] T odd, Phillips.
HARP 1000. Harp Performance Class. Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all harp majors, performance and musical arts.
Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Copely.
HORN 1000. Horn Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 111A ]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of horn majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] N orton.
OBOE 1000. Oboe Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 110D ]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all oboe majors,
performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Hauser.
PERC 1000. Percussion Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 110G]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all percussion
majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0]
Jung.
PIAN 1000. Piano Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 109D ]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all piano majors,
performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] D orfman, Krieger, N ies.
SAX 1000. Saxophone Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 110L ]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of saxophone majors,
performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] U tley.
TROM 1000. Trombone Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 111B]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all trombone majors,
performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Wilson.
TRPT 1000. Trumpet Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 110A ]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all trumpet and horn
majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0]
S ibaja.
TUBA 1000. Low Brass Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 110B]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all euphonium and
tuba majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail
basis. [0] L ong.
VLA 1000. Viola Performance Class. [Formerly MUS O 109G] Weekly
observation and participation. R equired of all viola majors, performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Kochanowski,
Plummer.
VLN 1000. Violin Performance/Studio Class. [Formerly MUS O 109B]
Weekly observation and participation. R equired of all violin majors,
performance and musical arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Heard,
Huebl, and Miahky.

B

282

vanderbilt university

Blair School of Music
MARK WAIT, D.M.A., Dean
MELISSA K. ROSE, D.M.A., Associate Dean, Collegiate Program
PAMELA SCHNELLER, M.C.M., Associate Dean, Precollege and Adult
Program
THOMAS R. CRESPO, M.M., Director, Admissions
MOLLY JEWELL, B.M., Assistant Director, Admissions
ROBERT HALLIBURTON, B.S., C.P.A., Business Officer
JOSEPH DEBUSK, Director of Technical Operations
THOMAS LANGMESSER, B.A., Academic Services Assistant
VIRGINIA PAYNE, B.A., Associate Dean for Blair Development and
Alumni Relations
KRISTIN WHITTLESEY, B.A., Director of External Relations

Music Library Staff
Holling Smith-Borne, M.L.S., Director
Sara J. Manus, M.L.S., Music Librarian for Public Services
Jacob Schaub, M.M., M.L.S., Music Librarian/Cataloging

Department Chairs
JEREMY WILSON, Brass and Percussion
CONNIE HEARD, Strings, Guitar, and Harp
PETER KOLKAY, Woodwinds
GREGORY MELCHOR-BARZ, Music Literature/History
AMY K. JARMAN and GAYLE SHAY, Voice Co-Chairs
MARIANNE PLOGER, Musicianship
MICHAEL SLAYTON, Composition/Theory
KAREN ANN KRIEGER and HEATHER CONNER, Keyboard Co-Chairs

Faculty Coordinators
TUCKER BIDDLECOMBE, Teacher Education Program
ROBIN FOUNTAIN, Ensembles
MICHAEL HIME and JAMA REAGAN, Music Minors
CHI-HEE HWANG, Precollege Group Piano
BRIAN UTLEY, Chamber Music
RYAN MIDDAGH, Jazz Studies
CRYSTAL PLOHMAN, Folk Instruments
PAMELA SCHNELLER, Precollege Scholarships
CARL F. SMITH, JR., Music as a Second Major
ZACHARY EBIN, Suzuki Program

COLLEGIATE ENSEMBLE DIRECTORS. Robin Fountain, Chair. Kwame
Ahima, Tucker Biddlecombe, Mat Britain, Ryan Middagh, Gayle Shay,
Tom Verrier, David B. Williams.
CONCERTO COMPETITION. Felix Wang, Chair. Robin Fountain, Bil
Jackson, Leslie Norton, Jama Reagan, William Wiggins.
CONCERTS. Kristin Whittlesey, Chair. Tucker Biddlecombe, Bil Jackson,
Ji Hye Jung, Joshua McGuire, Stephen Miahky, Ryan Middagh, Pamela
Schneller.
CURRICULUM. Joshua McGuire, Chair. Brian Utley, Robbie Fry, Stephen
Miahky, Amy Jarman, Melissa Rose, Michael Slayton.
DEPARTMENT CHAIRS. Mark Wait, Chair. Jeremy Wilson, Brass and
Percussion; Peter Kolkay, Woodwinds; Cornelia Heard, Strings, Guitar,
and Harp; Heather Conner and Karen Ann Krieger, Co-Chairs, Keyboard;
Gregory Melchor-Barz, Music Literature/History; Marianne Ploger,
Musicianship; Amy Jarman and Gayle Shay, Co-Chairs, Voice; Pamela
Schneller, Precollege and Adult Program; Michael Slayton, Composition/
Theory; Robin Fountain, Ensembles; Ryan Middagh, Jazz Studies; Ex
Officio: Melissa Rose, Associate Dean.
FACULTY ADVISORY COUNCIL. Mary Biddlecombe, Heather Conner,
Erin Perez, Josh McGuire.
FACULTY REVIEW. Michael Slayton, Chair. Heather Conner, Peter
Kolkay, Craig Nies, Leslie Norton, Marianne Ploger, Pamela Schneller.
FACULTY SENATE. Gayle Shay, Jeremy Wilson. Ex Officio: Mark Wait.
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES. Joy Calico, Melissa Rose.
MA5 ADVISORY. Tucker Biddlecombe, Chair. David Cassel, Ryan
Middagh, Erin Charles Perez, Joe Rea Phillips, Pamela Schneller, Jeremy
Wilson.
MUSIC LIBRARY. Jama Reagan, Chair. ChiHee Hwang, Melanie Lowe,
Jennifer McGuire, Michael Rose, Holling Smith-Borne.
PRECOLLEGE AND ADULT PROGRAM. Pamela Schneller, Chair. Mary
Biddlecombe, Kirsten Cassel Greer, Heather Conner, Paul Deakin,
ChiHee Hwang, Carol Nies, Zachary Ebin, Crystal Plohman.
PRECOLLEGE CERTIFICATE PROGRAM COUNCIL. Paul Deakin,
Chair. Heather Conner, Carolyn Huebl, Jama Reagan, Pamela Schneller,
Roland Schneller, Brian Utley.

Committees of the School

PRECOLLEGIATE ENSEMBLE DIRECTORS. Pamela Schneller, Chair.
Mary Biddlecombe, Kirsten Cassel Greer, Carol Nies, Crystal Plohman,
Zachary Ebin.

ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL. Mark Wait, Chair. Thomas Crespo, Heidi
Basgall Favorite, Robert Halliburton, Melissa Rose, Pamela Schneller,
Kristin Whittlesey.

STUDENT SHOWCASE. Ryan Middagh, Chair. Amy Dorfman, Jared
Hauser, Stephen Miahky, Gayle Shay, Jose Sibaja.

ADMISSIONS. Thomas Crespo, Chair. Tucker Biddlecombe, Amy
Dorfman, Carolyn Huebl, Bil Jackson, Melissa Rose, Gayle Shay, Michael
Slayton, Jeremy Wilson.

TENURE REVIEW. Gregory Barz and Robin Fountain, Co-Chairs. Joy
Calico, Cynthia Cyrus, Amy Dorfman, Connie Heard, Carolyn Huebl,
Kathryn Plummer, Douglas Lee, Felix Wang.

AWARDS. Karen Ann Krieger, Chair. Melissa Rose, Pamela Schneller.

WRITING PORTFOLIO ASSESSMENT. Melanie Lowe, Chair. Michael
Rose, Douglas Shadle.

BMI COMPOSER-IN-RESIDENCE. Michael Kurek, Chair. Bil Jackson,
Stan Link, Tom Verrier, Robin Fountain.
CALENDAR. Pamela Schneller, Chair. Mary Biddlecombe, Christine
Claffey, Joe DeBusk, Robin Fountain, Heidi Basgall Favorite, Kristin
Whittlesey.
CAREER-RELATED PROGRAMMING. Robbie Fry, Chair. Jen
Gunderman, Jared Hauser, Mitchell Korn, Karen Ann Krieger, Sara
Manus, Melissa Rose.

Blair School of Music / A dministration and Faculty

Faculty
OKYEREMA G. AHIMA, Adjunct Instructor in Music
[2005]
SALLY R. AHNER, Lecturer in Music
B.A. (Salem College 1970); M.A. (Eastman 1974) [2005]
AMY A. ALLEY, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Kindermusik; Adjunct Lecturer
in Teacher Education
B.M. (Tennessee 1977); M.M. (Peabody 1978) [2001]
ROLAND BARBER, Adjunct Associate Professor of Trombone and Jazz
Studies
B.Mus., Artist’s Diploma (Indiana, Bloomington 2001, 2003); M.M.
(Manhattan School of Music 2005) [2017]
MARTHA BARTLES, Adjunct Senior Artist Teacher of Piano
B.M. (Mississippi 1953); M.F.A. (Ohio 1954) [1997]
JOE JEFFERY BECKMAN, Senior Lecturer in Music
B.S. (Tennessee Technological 1983); M.A. (Cumberland 1997) [2015]
MARY BIDDLECOMBE, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Chorus
B.M.Ed. (SUNY, Potsdam 1999); M.M. (Florida State 2005) [2012]
TUCKER BIDDLECOMBE, Associate Professor of Choral Activities and
Choral Director
B.M. (SUNY, Potsdam 1998); M.M., Ph.D. (Florida State 2003, 2012)
[2012]
EMELYNE M. BINGHAM, Senior Lecturer in the Teaching of Music
B.S. (Tennessee Technological 1983); M.M. (Indiana, Bloomington
1986) [1986]
CHARLES (ODIE) BLACKMON, Lecturer in Music
B.A. (Middle Tennessee State 1996) [2010]
JESSICA BLACKWELL, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Violin
B.M. (Rice 2006); M.M. (Johns Hopkins, Peabody Institute 2008) [2009]
POLLY P. BRECHT, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Accompanying
B.M., M.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1979, 1980); D.M. (Florida State
1986) [1996]
PAULA BRESSMAN, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Harp
B.M. (Vanderbilt 2007); M.M. (Cincinnati 2010) [2016]
MAT BRITAIN, Adjunct Instructor in Music
B.M.Ed. (Wichita State 1985) [2004]
MAEVE BROPHY, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Accompanying
M.M. (Texas Christian 2008) [2012]
ALISON BROWN, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Banjo
A.B. (Harvard 1984); M.B.A. (California, Los Angeles 1986) [2010]
JOY H. CALICO, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of Musicology
B.M. (Baylor 1988); M.M. (Illinois, Champaign 1992); Ph.D. (Duke
1999) [2003]
DAVID C. CASSEL, Adjunct Associate Professor of Music
B.M. (Bowling Green State 1967); M.M., D.M. (Indiana, Bloomington
1968, 1977) [1981]
BRITTANY E. CHASE, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Music
A.B. (Middle Tennessee State 2011); M.M. (Florida 2013) [2016]
DALE COCKRELL, Professor of Musicology, Emeritus
B.M., M.M., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1971, 1973, 1978) [1996]
JEFF COFFIN, Adjunct Instructor in Jazz Saxophone
B.A. (North Texas 1990) [2015]
MATT COMBS, Adjunct Instructor in Fiddling and Violin; Director of the
Fiddling Program
B.M. (Michigan 1997) [2004]
HEATHER CONNER, Senior Artist Teacher of Piano
B.Mus. (Curtis Institute of Music 1997); M.M. (Yale 1999); D.M.A.
(Manhattan School of Music 2006) [2015]
PETER COOPER, Senior Lecturer In Music History and Literature
B.A. (Wofford 1993) [2008]
KIRSTEN AGRESTA COPELY, Adjunct Associate Professor of Harp
B.M., M.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1991, 1992) [2017]
LAUREN JACKSON COPLAN, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Piano
B.M. (Boston University 1991) [2011]
ELIZABETH F. CORMIER, Senior Artist Teacher of Piano, Emerita
A.B. (Smith 1947); B.M. (New England Conservatory 1950); M.A.
(Columbia 1955) [1967]
ALLAN E. COX, Professor of Trumpet, Emeritus
B.M.Ed. (Nebraska 1968); M.M. (Wichita State 1970) [1998]

283
CYNTHIA J. CYRUS, Professor of Musicology
B.A. (Pomona 1984); M.A., Ph.D. (North Carolina 1987, 1990) [1994]
GARNETT R. DAVIS, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Tuba
B.S. (North Alabama 1968); M.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1974) [1992]
PAUL DEAKIN, Senior Lecturer in Music Theory
B.A., Ph.D. (Birmingham [U.K.] 1990, 2002) [2004]
AMY R. DORFMAN, Professor of Piano
B.M., Performer’s Certificate, M.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1977, 1978,
1981) [1984]
BRUCE DUDLEY, Adjunct Instructor in Jazz Piano
B.S. (New York 1984); M.M. (Eastman 1986); D.M.A. (Colorado 2010)
[2005]
JESSICA DUNNAVANT, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Flute
B.M. (Middle Tennessee State 1998); M.M. (Florida State 2000);
D.M.A. (Maryland-College Park 2004) [2017]
ZACHARY EBIN, Senior Artist Teacher of Suzuki Violin; Director of the
Suzuki Program
B.A., M.A. (Brandeis 2004, 2007); M.M. (Berklee College of Music,
2006); Ph.D. (York 2015) [2017]
CYNTHIA F. ESTILL, Senior Artist Teacher of Bassoon
B.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1971); M.M. (Peabody 1975) [1972]
LESLIE FAGAN, Associate Professor of Flute
B.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1993); M.M., D.Mus. (Northwestern 1995,
2005) [2017]
ROBIN P. FOUNTAIN, Professor of Conducting; Director of the
Vanderbilt Orchestra
B.A., M.A. (Oxford [U.K.] 1981, 1982); M.F.A. (Carnegie Mellon 1986)
[1994]
ROBERT WEBB FRY II, Senior Lecturer in Music History and Literature
B.M.Ed. (Henderson State 1998); M.M. (Ohio State 2004); Ph.D.
(Florida State 2010) [2007]
MEGAN GALE, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Accompanying
B.M. (Oberlin 1998); M.M. (Southern California 2000); D.M.A.
(Colorado 2007) [2012]
KIRSTEN CASSEL GREER, Senior Artist Teacher of Suzuki Cello
B.M. (South Carolina 2002); M.M. (Eastman 2005) [2006]
JENNIFER GUNDERMAN, Assistant Professor of Musicology
B.A. (Vassar 1992); M.A. (University of Washington 1996) [2006]
ERIN HALL, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Violin
B.M. (Juilliard 1996); M.M. (Cleveland Institute of Music 1998) [2003]
BEN HARRIS, Senior Lecturer in Music
A.A. (Frank Phillips 1998); B.M. (Oklahoma Baptist 2000); M.M.
(Baylor 2002) [2012]
CALEB HARRIS, Adjunct Associate Professor of Piano
B.M. (Oklahoma Baptist 2002); M.M., Performer’s Certificate, D.M.A.
(Eastman 2004, 2007, 2009) [2016]
JARED HAUSER, Associate Professor of Oboe
B.M. (Michigan 1994); Artist’s Diploma (Ohio State 1997); M.M. (Rice
1999); D.M.A. (Michigan State 2013) [2008]
CORNELIA L. HEARD, Professor of Violin
B.M., M.M. (Juilliard 1978, 1979); B.A. (Sarah Lawrence 1980) [1982]
MARY ANN HEWLETT, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Voice
B.M. (Vanderbilt 2010); M.M. (Rider 2013) [2016]
MICHAEL S. HIME, Senior Lecturer in Music Literature
B.A., M.M. (Peabody 1973, 1977) [1986]
CAROLYN HUEBL, Professor of Violin
B.M., M.M. (Cleveland Institute of Music 1992, 1994); D.M.A.
(Michigan 1998) [2001]
CHI-HEE HWANG, Senior Artist Teacher of Piano
B.M. (Hanyang University [Korea] 2000); M.M. (Tennessee 2004)
[2005]
JUN IWASAKI, Adjunct Professor of Violin
B.M., M.M. (Cleveland Institute of Music 2004, 2006) [2011]
BIL JACKSON, Associate Professor of Clarinet
[2011]
AMY K. JARMAN, Senior Lecturer in Voice
B.A. (Evansville 1978); Performance Diploma (Royal College of Music
[England] 1990) [1986]

B

284
JOHN F. JOHNS, Professor of Guitar, Emeritus
B.M. (Johns Hopkins, Peabody Institute 1970); M.S. (Peabody 1979)
[1980]
SARA JOHNSON, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Suzuki Violin
B.S. (North Carolina, Greensboro 1974); M.F.A. (Iowa State 1977)
[1997]
JI HYE JUNG, Associate Professor of Percussion
B.M. (Johns Hopkins, Peabody Institute 2007); M.M. (Yale 2009) [2015]
ENID KATAHN, Professor of Piano, Emerita
B.M. (Hartford 1955); M.M. (Peabody 1970) [1977]
JEROME J. KIMBROUGH, Adjunct Associate Professor of Guitar
B.M. (Miami 1982) [2006]
JANE B. KIRCHNER, Associate Professor of Flute, Emerita
B.M.E., M.M.E., Ed.S. (Peabody 1966, 1967, 1968) [1966]
JOHN KOCHANOWSKI, Associate Professor of Viola
[1987]
PETER KOLKAY, Associate Professor of Bassoon
B.M. (Lawrence 1998); M.M. (Eastman 2000); M.M.A., D.M.A. (Yale
2002, 2005) [2012]
MITCHELL KORN, Senior Lecturer in Music and Educational Outreach
B.A. (Bard [New York] 1974); M.A. (Columbia 1984) [2009]
SHEREE KOUTSOUKOS, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Piano
B.A. (Wartburg College 1996); M.M. (Notre Dame 1998) [2002]
KAREN A. KRIEGER, Associate Professor of Piano
B.Mus. (Western Illinois 1976); M.M. (Illinois, Champaign 1978) [1988]
PATRICK KUNKEE, Adjunct Associate Professor of Trumpet
B.M. (California State, Northridge 1987); M.M. (Southern California
1989) [1991]
MICHAEL H. KUREK, Associate Professor of Composition
B.M. (Tennessee 1977); M.M., A.Mus.D. (Michigan 1981, 1985) [1988]
ZADA LAW, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Dulcimer
B.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1976); M.A. (Wisconsin 1980) [2006]
CASSANDRA D. LEE, Senior Artist Teacher of Clarinet
B.S. (Tennessee 1975); M.M. (Northwestern 1979) [1981]
DOUGLAS A. LEE, Professor of Musicology, Emeritus
B.M. (DePauw 1954); M.M., Ph.D. (Michigan 1958, 1968) [1986]
STANLEY B. LINK, Associate Professor of the Philosophy and Analysis
of Music
B.M. (Oberlin 1986); M.F.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1992, 1995) [1999]
GILBERT A. LONG, Adjunct Associate Professor of Tuba
B.M.A. (Louisville 1975) [1995]
JAMES LOVENSHEIMER, Associate Professor of Musicology
B.M. (Tennessee 1994); M.A., Ph.D. (Ohio State 1997, 2002) [2002]
MELANIE LOWE, Associate Professor of Musicology
B.A. (Smith 1990); M.F.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1992, 1998) [1998]
CRAIG MADOLE, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Orchestra
B.M. (Belmont 2007) [2012]
BRADLEY D. MANSELL, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Cello
B.M. (Youngstown State 1982); M.M. (Cincinnati 1984) [1990]
CHRISTINA MCGANN, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Violin
B.M., M.M. (Juilliard 2007, 2009); D.M.A. (Stony Brook 2015) [2014]
JENNIFER MCGUIRE, Senior Lecturer in Collaborative Piano
B.M. (Shorter 2002); M.M. (Cincinnati 2005) [2009]
JOSHUA MCGUIRE, Senior Lecturer in Aural Skills
B.M. (Vanderbilt 2003); M.M. (Cincinnati 2005) [2007]
SARAH MCWHIRT-TOLER, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Dulcimer
B.A. (Belmont 2012) [2013]
GREGORY F. MELCHOR-BARZ, Professor of Musicology
(Ethnomusicology); Professor of Religion; Associate Professor of
Anthropology
B.M. (North Carolina School of the Arts 1982); M.A. (Chicago 1992);
Ph.D. (Brown 1997) [1998]
STEPHEN MIAHKY, Joseph Joachim Chair; Associate Professor of Violin
B.M., M.M. (Michigan 2001, 2003); D.M.A. (Rutgers 2009) [2014]
RYAN MIDDAGH, Senior Lecturer in Jazz Studies; Director of Jazz
Studies
B.M.Ed. (Northern Iowa 2008); M.A. (Middle Tennessee State 2010);
D.A. (Northern Colorado 2016) [2014]
VALERIE MIDDLETON, Adjunct Senior Artist Teacher of Piano
B.M. (Yankton 1979); M.M. (Colorado 1983) [2007]

vanderbilt university
CHERI MONTGOMERY, Adjunct Senior Lecturer in Vocal Diction
B.M., M.M. (Tennessee 1987, 1990) [2002]
TYLER SCOTT NELSON, Associate Professor of Voice
B.Mus., M.M. (Utah 2004, 2006); D.M. (Florida State 2009) [2016]
CAROL R. NIES, Adjunct Senior Artist Teacher of Conducting
B.M. (Miami 1979); M.M. (Yale 1981); D.M.A. (Cincinnati 2001) [1996]
CRAIG NIES, Associate Professor of Piano
B.M. (Curtis Institute of Music 1974); M.M., M.M.A. (Yale 1979, 1980);
D.Mus.A. (Stony Brook 1991) [1991]
LESLIE B. NORTON, Associate Professor of French Horn
B.M., Performer’s Certificate (Eastman 1984, 1984) [1989]
ROBERT W. PEARCY, Adjunct Associate Professor of Mandolin
[2009]
ERIN CHARLES PEREZ, Lecturer in the Teaching of Music
B.M., M.Ed., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 2006, 2007, 2014) [2011]
DERREK C. PHILLIPS, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Percussion
B.A. (William Paterson 1998) [2010]
JOE REA PHILLIPS, JR., Senior Artist Teacher of Guitar
M.S., B.S. (Peabody 1977, 1977) [1985]
JOHN PITCHER, Adjunct Associate Professor of Music
B.A. (Catholic 1984); M.S. (Columbia 1998) [2013]
MARIANNE PLOGER, Associate Professor of Music Perception and
Cognition
B.M. (Missouri, Saint Louis 1976); M.M. (Michigan 1980) [2007]
CRYSTAL D. PLOHMAN, Senior Artist Teacher of Fiddling
[1994]
KATHRYN C. PLUMMER, Professor of Viola
B.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1970) [1974]
MICHAEL PORTER, Adjunct Associate Professor of Music Business
B.A. (Trevecca Nazarene 2001) [2012]
TRACY S. PRENTICE, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Voice
B.M. (Alabama, Huntsville 1978); M.M. (Yale 1981) [1983]
SUSAN RAMSAY, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Orff/Kodály Methods
B.M.Ed. (Peabody 1975); M.M.A. (Middle Tennessee State 1982)
[2009]
JAMA A. REAGAN, Senior Artist Teacher of Piano
B.M. (North Carolina School of the Arts 1987); Associate Diploma
(Royal College of Music [England] 1992); Licentiate Diploma (Guildhall
School of Music [U.K.] 1995); M.M. (Austin Peay State 2004) [1997]
DANIEL REINKER, Adjunct Associate Professor of Viola
B.M. (Cincinnati 1979); M.M. (Yale 1981) [2002]
JOEL REIST, Adjunct Associate Professor of Bass
B.F.A. (Carnegie Mellon 1993); M.M. (Rice 1996) [2004]
SARI REIST, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Cello
B.M. (San Francisco Conservatory 1995) [2016]
KEVIN A. RILLING, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Music
B.M. (Vanderbilt 2012); M.M. (Cincinnati 2015) [2016]
MELISSA K. ROSE, Associate Dean, Collegiate Program; Associate
Professor of Piano
B.M. (West Chester 1983); M.M. (Yale 1985); D.M.A. (Michigan 1988)
[1996]
MICHAEL A. ROSE, Associate Professor of Composition
B.A., M.A. (Pennsylvania 1981, 1982); Ph.D. (Eastman 1985) [1986]
LEE ROWE, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Dulcimer
B.F.A. (Virginia Commonwealth 1987) [2006]
JOSHUA SALAZAR, Lecturer in Music
B.M., M.M. (Belmont 2013, 2015) [2016]
JOHN F. SAWYER, Dean of the Blair School of Music, Emeritus;
Professor of Music Performance, Emeritus
B.M. (Mississippi 1953); M.M. (Peabody 1954) [1964]
PAMELA R. SCHNELLER, Associate Dean, Precollege and Adult
Program; Senior Lecturer in Choral Music
B.S.M.E. (Illinois, Champaign 1972); M.C.M. (Scarritt 1987) [1988]
ROLAND A. SCHNELLER, Senior Artist Teacher of Piano, Emeritus
B.M. (Mount Union 1961); M.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1963) [1964]
DOUGLAS SHADLE, Assistant Professor of Musciology
B.M. (Houston 2004); M.A., Ph.D. (North Carolina 2006, 2010) [2014]

Blair School of Music / A dministration and Faculty
GAYLE SHAY, Associate Professor of Voice; Director of Vanderbilt Opera
Theatre
B.A. (Luther 1986); M.M. (Maryland 1990); D.M.A. (Colorado 1998)
[1998]
JOSE SIBAJA, Associate Professor of Trumpet
[2016]
CHRISTINA SIMPSON, Adjunct Senior Artist Teacher of Suzuki Violin
B.M. (Cincinnati 1982) [2015]
MICHAEL K. SLAYTON, Associate Professor of Composition and Theory
B.A. (Lipscomb 1994); M.M., D.M.A. (Houston 1996, 2000) [1999]
CARL F. SMITH, JR., Senior Lecturer in Music Composition and Theory
B.M. (Baldwin-Wallace 1971); M.M. (Washington University 1975)
[1998]
MATTHEW SMYTH, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Chorus, Assistant Director
B.M. (Moravian 2005); M.M. (Oklahoma 2009) [2017]
ROGER A. SPENCER, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Jazz Ensemble
B.M.Ed. (Indiana State 1974) [2002]
BOBBY G. TAYLOR, Professor of Oboe, Emeritus
B.M.E. (Louisville 1962) [1969]
CHRISTIAN TEAL, Professor of Violin, Emeritus
B.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1969); M.M. (Catholic University of
America 1971) [1972]
RICHARD TODD, Adjunct Associate Professor of Guitar
B.M. (Cincinnati 1990); M.M. (Southern Methodist 1993); D.Mus.A.
(North Texas 2007) [2016]
ERIC TSATSU, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Music
[2013]
CELESTE H. TUTEN, Senior Artist Teacher of Suzuki Violin
B.M.E. (Peabody 1974); M.Ed. (Memphis State 1976) [1990]
BRIAN UTLEY, Senior Lecturer in Saxophone
B.M. (Murray State 1995); M.M., D.M.A. (Louisiana State 1997, 2001)
[2010]
THOMAS E. VERRIER, Associate Professor and Director of Wind Studies;
Senior Band Conductor and Director of Wind Ensembles
B.M. (Ithaca 1987); M.M. (California State 1994); D.M.A. (Colorado
1998) [2002]
PATSY WADE, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Piano
B.M. (Birmingham-Southern 1971); M.M. (Peabody 1972) [1998]
MARK WAIT, Martha Rivers Ingram Dean’s Chair; Professor of Music;
Dean of the Blair School of Music
B.M. (Wichita State 1971); M.M. (Kansas State 1973); D.M.A. (Johns
Hopkins 1976) [1993]
DEANNA WALKER, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Piano
B.M. (Eastern New Mexico, Roswell 1986); M.M. (Johns Hopkins
1988) [1998]
FELIX WANG, Professor of Cello
B.M. (Johns Hopkins, Peabody Institute 1991); M.M. (New England
Conservatory 1992); D.M.A. (Michigan 1998) [1999]
GLEN WANNER, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Bass
B.M. (Southern California 1986); M.M. (New England Conservatory
1988) [1994]
ALISON WARFORD, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Chorus
B.A. (Oklahoma Baptist 1985); M.Div. (Southern Baptist Theological
Seminary 1988); M.A. (Vanderbilt 2002) [2008]
CHRISTINA WATSON, Lecturer in Jazz Vocal Ensemble
B.A. (Centre 1995); M.A. (Tennessee 1998); Performance Diploma
(Berklee 2001) [2016]
ROGER WIESMEYER, Adjunct Associate Professor of Oboe
B.M. (Curtis Institute of Music 1987) [2002]
WILLIAM G. WIGGINS, Associate Professor of Percussion
B.S. (Peabody 1968); M.M. (Northwestern 1989) [1973]
ANNE H. WILLIAMS, Adjunct Senior Artist Teacher of Suzuki Cello
B.M. (Kentucky, Lexington 1965); M.A. (Indiana [Pennsylvania] 1972)
[1986]
DAVID BINNS WILLIAMS, Senior Lecturer in Musicianship and Choral
Studies
B.M., M.M. (Indiana, Bloomington 1993, 1995); M.M. (Cincinnati
2000) [1995]
SARAH WILLIAMS, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Music
B.M. (Vanderbilt 2006) [2017]

285
JEREMY WILSON, Associate Professor of Trombone
B.M. (Tennessee 2005); M.M. (North Texas 2011) [2012]
ROBIN WINKOWSKI, Adjunct Artist Teacher of Music
B.M.A. (Middle Tennessee State 2001) [2013]

B

School of
Engineering
E

Engineering Education
in a University Setting

288

Degree Programs in Engineering

290

Special Programs

292

Honors

294

Academic Regulations

296

Courses of Study

301

Engineering Courses

325

Administration and Faculty

350

288

VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY

Engineering Education in a University Setting

V

ANDERBILT University School of Engineering is the
largest and oldest private engineering school in the
South. Classes offering engineering instruction began
in 1879, and seven years later Engineering was made a separate
department with its own dean. The school’s program emphasizes the relationship of the engineering profession to society
and prepares engineers to be socially aware as well as technically competent.
The mission of the School of Engineering is threefold: to
prepare undergraduate and graduate students for roles that
contribute to society; to conduct research to advance the
state of knowledge and technology and to disseminate these
advances through archival publications, conference publications, and technology transfer; and to provide professional
services to the community.
The school strives to meet the undergraduate education
portion of its mission by offering degree programs in fields of
engineering relevant to the needs of society. An objective of
these programs is to provide a technical education integrated
with strong humanities, fine arts, and social sciences subject
matter to provide the requisite foundation for life-long learning. The availability of second majors and minors in subject
areas in other schools and colleges of the university increases
opportunities for engineering students to enhance their
education by pursuing studies in the non-technical disciplines.
Engineering students take close to 50 percent of their courses
outside of the School of Engineering and associate daily with
peers from other schools and colleges within the university.
Another objective is to accommodate students who will
continue their studies at the graduate level in engineering
or in other professional fields, as well as those who intend to
enter engineering practice upon graduation. To this end, our
programs emphasize mathematics and engineering sciences,
yet provide significant exposure to engineering design and
hands-on laboratory experiences.
A large fraction of the student body is destined for management positions early in their working careers. To meet these
students’ needs, the Engineering Management program offers
a well-integrated curriculum, including a minor.
The bachelor of engineering serves those programs in
engineering where professional registration through state
boards is desirable or necessary. Typically, about 90 percent
of the students are enrolled in programs that are accredited by
the Engineering Accreditation Commission or the Computing
Accreditation Commission of ABET (abet.org).
The bachelor of science addresses the needs of those students seeking specialized programs not served by conventional
engineering degree programs. The degree provides students
with a general scientific and engineering background while
allowing individual curricular desires to be addressed. For
example, students who want to use a degree from the School of
Engineering to enter the primary or secondary education fields
may include the necessary courses in education from Peabody
College in their engineering degree program.
Students at all levels have the opportunity to work with
faculty in the generation of new knowledge. Those planning
for graduate studies and research may participate in individual
topics and research courses to fulfill that desire. Engineering

students also participate in the university’s Summer Research
Program for Undergraduates.
Facilities
The School of Engineering is housed in 5 main buildings with
several satellite facilities. William W. Featheringill Hall which
houses a three-story atrium designed for student interaction and social events, more than fifty teaching and research
laboratories with the latest equipment and computer resources,
and project rooms. The new Engineering and Science building is an eight-story state of the art building that houses the
Wond'ry at the Innovation Pavilion, numerous research labs,
interactive class rooms, clean rooms and space for students
to work, study and socialize. School administrative offices
and several classrooms are located on the ground floor of the
Science and Engineering building in Stevenson Center, which
also houses the Biomedical Engineering Department on the
8th and 9th floors. Jacobs Hall, which flanks Featheringill
Hall, contains laboratories, office and classrooms serving both
the Civil and Environmental Engineering Department and
the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department. The Olin Hall of Engineering houses Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and
Materials Science. Several other satellite facilities that are
part of the Engineering School include: the W. M. Keck Free
Electron Laser Center building, housing the labs and offices of
the Biomedical Photonics Center; the LASIR (laboratory for
systems integrity and reliability), a hangar-style facility located
off-campus dedicated to scaling up experiments to realistic
and full size, including a wind tunnel and military aircraft;
the MuMS facility (multiscale modeling and simulation); the
Vanderbilt Institute of Software Integrated Systems; and the
Institute for Space and Defense Electronics, providing office
space, dry laboratories and conference space.
In all its engineering programs, Vanderbilt recognizes
the valid place of experimental and research laboratories in
the learning experience. Laboratories are planned to provide
the strongest personal contact between students and faculty
members consistent with enrollment.
Well-equipped undergraduate laboratories are maintained
by the Departments of Chemistry and Physics in the College
of Arts and Science, which offers mathematics and basic
science courses required of all engineering students. Graduate
and undergraduate divisions of these departments maintain
teaching and research facilities in the Stevenson Center for the
Natural Sciences, as does the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences. Another supporting department, Biological Sciences, is housed in Medical Research Building III. Most
classes in humanities and the social sciences are conducted in
Buttrick, Calhoun, Furman, Garland, and Wilson halls.
Accreditation
All programs leading to the B.E. degree are accredited by the
Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET (abet.org).
The bachelor of science program in computer science is accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of ABET
(abet.org).

School of Engineering / Engineering Education in a University Setting

289

Employment of Graduates
Of the recent Vanderbilt graduates with baccalaureate degrees
in engineering, about 70 percent entered directly into professional practice. Thirty percent continued with graduate or professional education. Others pursued diverse careers or other
interests. Additional information regarding the employment
of engineering graduates is available in the Career Center.

Supporting Organizations
Vanderbilt Engineering Council
The Engineering Council is a student organization whose
main goal is facilitating communication between administration, faculty, and students in the School of Engineering. Officers of the Engineering Council are elected by the engineering
student body, and representatives from the professional
societies complete the organization’s membership. While the
council has no administrative power, it provides students
with a voice in the decision-making process in the School of
Engineering.
Professional Societies
The leading national engineering societies have chartered
branches or student sections at Vanderbilt. These organizations are run locally by students with the help of a faculty
adviser. Meetings are devoted to matters of a technical nature,
including films, outside speakers, plant trips, and other subjects of interest to the membership.
Student speakers from the Vanderbilt groups compete
annually with speakers from other groups in their region in
technical paper competitions.
Freshmen and sophomores are cordially invited to attend
meetings—and juniors and seniors are urged to join—as they
will find the work of the professional societies beneficial in
orienting them in their careers.
The student professional societies are:
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
(A.I.A.A.)
American Institute of Chemical Engineers (A.I.Ch.E)
American Society of Civil Engineers (A.S.C.E.)
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (A.S.M.E.)
American Society for Metals (A.S.M.)
Association for Computing Machinery (A.C.M.)
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (I.E.E.E.)
International Society for Hybrid Microelectronics
(I.S.H.M.)
International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE)
National Society of Black Engineers (N.S.B.E.)
Society of Automotive Engineers (S.A.E.)
Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (S.H.P.E.)
Society of Engineering Science (S.E.S.)
Society of Women Engineers (S.W.E.)
Vanderbilt Biomedical Engineering Society
Graduating seniors may join the Order of the Engineer, a
society that recognizes the commitment of its members to the
profession of engineering.

E

290

VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY

Degree Programs in Engineering

B

ACHELOR of engineering degree programs are offered
in the areas of biomedical, chemical, civil, computer,
electrical, and mechanical engineering. Many of these
programs allow considerable flexibility—but students are
required to include in their courses of study those bodies of
knowledge fundamental to each discipline.
Bachelor of science degree programs offered in the interdisciplinary engineering disciplines often allow strong concentration in other areas of engineering or in the College of

Arts and Science. The B.S. is awarded in the areas of computer
science and engineering science.
The school offers the master of engineering (M.Eng.), with
emphasis on engineering design and practice, in most areas
of study. The Graduate School, through departments of the
School of Engineering, offers the research-oriented Ph.D. and
M.S. degrees in eight major fields. Degree programs offered by
the School of Engineering are shown below.

Degree Programs
			

B.E.

B.S.

M.Eng.

M.S.

Ph.D.

Biomedical Engineering

•		

•

•

•

Chemical Engineering

•		

•

•

•

Civil Engineering

•		

•

•

•

Computer Engineering

•
•		

•

•

Computer Science		

Cyber-Physical Systems			

•

Electrical Engineering

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•		

Engineering Science		
Environmental Engineering

•
		

Materials Science and Engineering			
Mechanical Engineering

•		

Undergraduate Degrees
Bachelor of Engineering
The bachelor of engineering is offered in biomedical, chemical,
civil, computer, electrical, and mechanical engineering. The
B.E. degree requirements vary from 125 to 128 semester hours.
Students seeking double majors will require somewhat more
credit hours.
Bachelor of Science
The bachelor of science is offered in computer science and
engineering science, requiring 120 and 121 semester hours,
respectively. These programs have more flexibility in elective
choice than the B.E. degree programs.
The First Year
Many courses normally scheduled for the freshman year are
common to both the B.E. and B.S. degree programs. While the
curriculum for the freshman year is generally the same for all

•

students, there are important variations. For example, some
major programs require a full year of introductory chemistry;
others do not. Students should become familiar with requirements of those programs in which they have an interest
and confer with their adviser at the time of enrollment and
throughout the freshman year to work out a program of study
that will keep options open as long as possible.
Specimen curricula for the engineering programs are given
in the Courses of Study chapter. Requirements for the B.E. and
B.S. degrees for the various programs vary in the minimum
amount of work and specific course requirements in the basic
sciences and in specific subject requirements in mathematics.
Included in the freshman year is the course Engineering Science 1401–1403 (Introduction to Engineering), which introduces
the student to design tools used in all areas of engineering.
Some students may qualify for advanced placement or
advanced credit in mathematics, science, the humanities and
social sciences, or computer science. If advanced credit is
awarded, it will not affect the student’s Vanderbilt grade point
average.

School of Engineering / Degree Programs in Engineering

Mathematics and Physics
Entering engineering students will be placed in the appropriate level mathematics course. Students offering one full year or
more of high school credit in analytic geometry and calculus
may qualify for advanced placement in a regular sequence by
scoring well on the Advanced Placement Examination.
Students with high mathematical ability and achievement
may apply for enrollment in the Math 2500-2501 sequence
as a substitute for Math 2300. For more information, see the
course descriptions under Mathematics in the Arts and Science section of this catalog. For majors requiring Math 2420
(Methods of Ordinary Differential Equations), students may
select Math 2400 (Differential Equations with Linear Algebra)
as a substitute.
Students with inadequate backgrounds in mathematics
may be required to take Math 1005 (Pre-calculus Mathematics). Taking this course constitutes an additional requirement
for graduation.
Math 1010-1011 (Probability and Statistical Inference) and
Math 1100 (Survey of Calculus) cannot be credited toward a
degree in the School of Engineering.
Students with greater interest in physics may enroll in
Phys 1911, 1912, 1912L, and 2255L (Principles of Physics I and II
and labs) as substitutes for Phys 1601, 1602, 1601L, and 1602L
(General Physics I and II and labs), respectively.
Pre-calculus courses Phys 1010 and 1010L cannot be credited toward a degree in the School of Engineering.
Liberal Arts Core
In order to provide the elements of a general education
considered necessary for responsible practice as an educated
engineer, the School of Engineering requires each student to
complete at least 18 hours in the Liberal Arts Core comprising:
1. At least 3 hours selected from courses classified in the
AXLE Curriculum Course Distribution of the College of Arts
and Science as Humanities and Creative Arts (HCA), with the
exception of CMST 1500, 2100, 2110, and 2120, and
2. At least 3 hours selected from courses classified in the
AXLE Curriculum Course Distribution of the College of Arts
and Science as Social and Behavioral Sciences (SBS).
The remaining hours are to be selected from:
1. Courses classified in the AXLE Curriculum Course Distribution of the College of Arts and Science as Humanities and
Creative Arts (HCA), International Cultures (INT), History
and Culture of the United States (US), Social and Behavioral
Sciences (SBS), and Perspectives (P)
2. CS 1151 and ENGM 2440
3. Arabic 1101, Chinese 1011, 1012, 1101, English 1100, French
1101, German 1101, Greek 1101, Hebrew 1101, Italian 1101, Japanese 1011, 1012, 1101, Latin 1101, Portuguese 1101, Russian 1101,
and Spanish 1100, 1101
4. Peabody College courses in Psychology and Human Development numbered 1205, 1207, 1250, 2200, 2250, 2300, 2400,
2500, 2550, 2600, and 3150, and in Human and Organizational
Development numbered 1250, 1300, 2100, 2260, 2400, 2500,
2700, and 3232
5. All MUSC, MUSE, MUSO, COMP, MREP, MUTH, and
performance courses in the Blair School of Music, except
MUSO 1001

291

Open Electives
Courses excluded from the listings in the Liberal Arts Core
may be taken as open electives.
Officer Education
Course offerings in military science and naval science are
described in the chapter on Special Programs for Undergraduates near the front of the catalog. All officer education courses
designated as eligible for credit may be taken as open electives.
In addition, officer education courses in history and political
science carry AXLE designations and may be taken as part of
the Liberal Arts Core. AFROTC students may count 6 hours
of the military courses as open electives.

Master of Engineering
The master of engineering (M.Eng.) is an advanced professional degree awarded by the School of Engineering and especially designed for engineering practitioners who may prefer
to work while doing professional study. It is also suitable for
individuals who apply directly from undergraduate school—
but the thrust of the program is toward professional practice
in engineering rather than research or teaching. The degree
is currently offered in biomedical engineering, chemical
engineering, civil engineering, cyber-physical systems, electrical engineering, environmental engineering, and mechanical
engineering.
Students must complete 30 hours of approved course work.
For information on the Accelerated Graduate Program in
Engineering degrees, see the chapter on Special Programs. A
maximum of 6 hours of graduate-level course work may be
transferred from another institution. Residency requirements
are flexible, and a maximum period of seven years is allowed
to complete the degree. An extensive, written design report
shall be submitted on a project approved by the student’s
project adviser.
Admission to the Master of Engineering program normally
requires graduation from an approved undergraduate program in engineering or a related scientific discipline, attainment of a B average in undergraduate courses applicable to
the student’s career goals, and recommendations containing
favorable appraisals of professional promise and attitude. A
period of successful work experience prior to application to
the program will also be given consideration. Application for
admission should be sent to the associate dean of the School of
Engineering. Further information about the program may be
obtained by writing to the same office.
For international students who did not graduate from an
institution in a country where English is the official language,
proficiency in English must be shown by a minimum score of
89 on the TOEFL or 7 on the IELTS test.
For information on integrated bachelor and master of
engineering degrees, see the chapter on Special Programs.

E

292

vanderbilt university

Special Programs
Honors Programs
Honors programs allow selected undergraduate students to
develop individually through independent study and research.
Individual honors programs are described in the Courses of
Study chapter.
Requirements vary somewhat but, in general, to qualify for
consideration a student should have (a) completed the technical course requirements of the first two years, (b) attained
a minimum grade average of 3.5 in all work taken for credit,
and (c) shown evidence indicating a capacity for independent
study and/or research. Formal admission is by election of the
department concerned. Once admitted, candidates remain
in the program only if they maintain a 3.5 or higher grade
average.
Accepted candidates normally begin honors study in the
junior year, but exceptions may be made for outstanding
seniors.
Successful candidates are awarded Honors in their area of
interest. This designation appears on their diplomas.
Study Abroad
Vanderbilt's Global Education Office offers approximately
thirty programs that allow students to take engineering or
computer science courses in English abroad, in locations
ranging from Dublin to Sydney, Cape Town to Hong Kong.
There are no language prerequisites for these programs. These
programs also allow students to take a range of liberal arts
core and elective courses abroad. A student may not apply to
participate in a Vanderbilt approved direct-credit program
for transfer credit through a different university or through
an external agency and then seek to transfer that credit into
Vanderbilt. Financial aid can be used for study abroad during
the academic year, and scholarships are available to support
summer study abroad. Students are encouraged to discuss
with their academic advisers how best to incorporate study
abroad into their four-year plans of study. All students intending to receive credit from studying abroad must register their
travels in advance with International SOS. Further information
can be obtained from the Vanderbilt Global Education Office.
Teacher Education
Students who are interested in preparing for licensure as secondary school teachers should plan their programs in consultation with the associate dean in the School of Engineering. The
School of Engineering and Peabody College offer a teacher
education program leading to secondary school licensure in
physics (grades 9 through 12) and computer technology. Students major in engineering science in the School of Engineering
and complete a second major in education at Peabody College.
More specific information on professional education course
requirements can be found under the Licensure for Teaching
chapter in the Peabody College section of this catalog. Inquiries
can also be made to the Office of Teacher Licensure at Peabody.
Double Major
It is possible for a student to combine an engineering field
with a second area outside the School of Engineering. The
student must obtain prior approval of each department and

satisfy the requirements of each major, including the requirement regarding minimum grade point average.
Certain double majors involving two programs within
the School of Engineering have been approved by the faculty.
The approved double majors are biomedical engineering/
electrical engineering, and biomedical engineering/chemical
engineering.
The double major is indicated on the student’s transcript.
Only one degree is awarded, from the school in which the
student is enrolled.
Minors
A minor consists of at least five courses of at least 3 credit
hours each within a recognized area of knowledge. A minor
offers students more than a casual introduction to an area, but
less than a major. A minor is not a degree requirement, but
students may elect to complete one or more. Courses may not
be taken on a Pass/Fail basis. A minor for which all designated
courses are completed with a grade point average of at least 2.0
will be entered on the transcript at the time of graduation.
When a minor is offered in a discipline that offers a
major, only those courses that count toward the major may
be counted toward the minor. Students should refer to the
appropriate sections of this catalog for specific requirements.
Currently, minors are offered in engineering management,
materials science and engineering, computer science, environmental engi­neering, energy and environmental systems, nanoscience and nanotechnology, scientific computing, and most
disciplines of the College of Arts and Science, Blair School of
Music, and Peabody College.
Students should declare their intention to pursue minors
by completing forms available in the Student Services Office of
the School of Engineering. Departments and programs assign
advisers to students who declare minors in their areas. Students are responsible for knowing and satisfying all requirements for the minors they intend to complete.
Three-Two Program
The School of Engineering recognizes a Three-Two program
with certain liberal arts colleges. This plan allows students to
attend a liberal arts college for three years of undergraduate
study, usually majoring in mathematics or science, where
they meet the residence requirements for a degree from that
institution. They then transfer to the Vanderbilt University
School of Engineering for two years of technical work in an
engineering curriculum. Upon completion of the five years,
students receive two bachelor’s degrees, one from the liberal
arts college and one from the School of Engineering. Students
who lack the preparation to begin the junior curriculum in
their major will need three years at Vanderbilt to complete the
bachelor of engineering.
To complete all required technical courses at Vanderbilt in
two years, students enrolled in the Three-Two program should
complete, before coming to Vanderbilt, as many as possible
of the mathematics and science courses listed in the specimen
curriculum—in general, mathematics through differential
equations, a year of physics, a year of another laboratory
science (usually chemistry), and a semester of computer

School of Engineering / Special Programs

programming. Students should plan their three years of liberal
arts study so as to satisfy as nearly as possible the freshman
and sophomore requirements of the particular engineering
curriculum in which they will major at Vanderbilt.
Admission to the Three-Two program must be certified by
the liberal arts college and is recognized by Vanderbilt University School of Engineering through special agreement between
Vanderbilt and each of the liberal arts colleges participating in
the Three-Two program.
Dual Degree Program with Fisk University
A coordinated dual degree program between the Vanderbilt
University School of Engineering and Fisk University is especially designed to permit students to obtain an A.B. degree in
biology, chemistry, computer science, physics, or mathematics from Fisk and a B.E. or B.S. degree in engineering from
Vanderbilt, generally within five years.
For the first three years, the student is enrolled at Fisk in
a science curriculum and, by cross-registration in the second
and third years, takes introductory engineering courses at
Vanderbilt. During the fourth and fifth years, the student is
enrolled at Vanderbilt, following principally an engineering
curriculum at Vanderbilt and completing science courses at
Fisk. At the end of five years, the student should be able to
satisfy the requirements for both bachelor’s degrees.
Financial aid is available for qualified, deserving students.
Additional information is available from the director of transfer admissions in the Office of Undergraduate Admissions.
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science/Master of
Science in Finance
A program of study is available in which students can obtain
a B.S. in computer science from the School of Engineering in
four years and be well prepared for admission to the Master
of Science in Finance program in the Owen Graduate School
of Management. Students spend their fifth year of study at the
Owen School. Admission to the Master of Science in Finance
program is contingent upon performance. Students receive a
strong background in computer programming and economics; minors in engineering management and mathematics
are facilitated, providing further depth in preparation for the
M.S.F. The recommended curriculum is maintained on the
computer science portion of the webpages of the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
Integrated Bachelor and Master of Engineering
On the basis of recommendations containing favorable
appraisals of professional promise, undergraduate students
in the School of Engineering who have completed at least 75
hours with at least a 3.0 grade point average may be accepted
into an integrated Bachelor of Engineering–Master of Engineering program. The last two years of a student’s program is
planned as a unit.
With the approval of the student’s adviser, the director of
graduate studies in the student’s major department, and the
senior associate dean, students apply through the associate
dean for graduate studies for admission to this integrated
dual degree program. Upon admission to this program, a
second “career” will be set up for the student which will allow
the student to start taking graduate courses (course numbers
> 5000) during the junior and senior years. These courses will
be credited toward the master of engineering. Note that no
double counting of courses is allowed (i.e., the student must

293

meet the degree requirements for each degree independent of
the other degree). The student typically receives the bachelor’s
degree at the end of the fourth year and completes the master
of engineering during the fifth year. Further information
can be obtained from the director of graduate studies of the
student’s major department.
Accelerated Graduate Program in Engineering
Students who enter Vanderbilt with a significant number of
credits (20 to 30 hours), earned either through Advanced
Placement tests or in college courses taken during high school,
may be eligible for the Accelerated Graduate Program in
Engineering. Through this program, a student is able to earn
both a bachelor’s degree and a master of science in about the
same time required for the bachelor’s degree. To be eligible for
the program a student must complete 86 hours (senior standing) by the end of the sophomore year with at least a 3.5 grade
point average. With the approval of the student’s adviser, the
director of graduate studies in the student’s major department,
and the senior associate dean, students apply through the associate dean for graduate studies for admission to this accelerated dual degree program. Upon admission to this program, a
second “career” will be set up for the student which will allow
the student to start taking graduate courses (course numbers
> 5000) during the junior and senior years. These courses will
be credited toward the master of science. Note that no double
counting of courses is allowed (i.e., the student must meet the
degree requirements for each degree independent of the other
degree). The student receives the bachelor’s degree at the end
of the fourth year and typically spends the summer finishing
a master’s thesis to complete the master of science. Further
information can be obtained from the director of graduate
studies of the student’s major department.

E

294

vanderbilt university

Honors
Founder’s Medal
The Founder’s Medal, signifying first honors, was endowed
by Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt as one of his gifts
to the university. The recipient is named by the dean after
consideration of faculty recommendations and the grade point
averages of the year’s summa cum laude graduates.
Latin Honors Designation
Honors noted on diplomas and published in the Commencement
Program are earned as follows:
Summa Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average
equals or exceeds that of the top 5 percent of the previous
year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Magna Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average
equals or exceeds that of the next 8 percent of the previous
year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average equals
or exceeds that of the next 12 percent of the previous year’s
Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Dean’s List
The Dean’s List recognizes outstanding academic performance
in a semester. Students are named to the Dean’s List when they
earn a grade point average of at least 3.500 while carrying 12 or
more graded hours, with no temporary or missing grades in
any course (credit or non-credit) and no grade of F.
Honor Societies
TAU BETA PI. The Tennessee Beta chapter of the Tau Beta Pi Association
was installed at Vanderbilt University 7 December 1946. Members of Tau
Beta Pi are selected from undergraduate students in the School of Engineering who have completed at least four semesters of required work, are
in the upper eighth of their class scholastically, and have shown marked
qualities of character and leadership; seniors in the upper fifth of their class
scholastically are also eligible for election.
CHI EPSILON. The Vanderbilt chapter of Chi Epsilon, installed 18 March
1967, is restricted to undergraduate civil engineering students in the top
third of their class. Election is based on grade point average, faculty recommendation, and exceptional achievements in extracurricular campus
activities.
ETA KAPPA NU. The Epsilon Lambda chapter of the Eta Kappa Nu
Association was established 22 April 1966. Undergraduate members are
selected from the upper third of the class in electrical engineering. Eta
Kappa Nu recognizes leadership and scholastic accomplishment twice
annually, selecting members also from the professional body of practicing
engineers.
ALPHA SIGMA MU. The Vanderbilt chapter of Alpha Sigma Mu was
installed in 1977. Senior materials engineering students in the upper
twenty percent of their graduating class are eligible upon recommendation of departmental faculty.

PI TAU SIGMA. The Delta Alpha chapter of Pi Tau Sigma was installed on
the Vanderbilt campus 22 April 1971, for the purpose of recognizing scholastic achievement and professional promise in junior and senior mechanical engineering students. Students are elected to membership twice each
year on the basis of academic excellence and recommendations from the
faculty and chapter members.
SIGMA XI. The Vanderbilt chapter of the Society of the Sigma Xi recognizes accomplishment, devotion, and originality in scientific research.
Associate members are elected annually from graduate-level students of
the university.
HONOR SOCIETIES FOR FRESHMEN. Freshmen who earn a grade point
average of 3.5 or better for their first semester are eligible for membership
in the Vanderbilt chapter of Phi Eta Sigma and Alpha Lambda Delta.

Other Awards and Prizes
DEAN’S AWARD FOR OUTSTANDING SERVICE. Awarded to the senior
candidate in the School of Engineering who has shown remarkable leadership qualities and who has also made the greatest contribution in personal
services to the School.
DEAN’S AWARD FOR OUTSTANDING SCHOLARSHIP. Awarded to each
member of the senior class who graduates summa cum laude.
PROGRAM AWARDS. The faculty associated with each of the departments
of the school annually bestows a certificate and a prize to one member of
the graduating class who is judged to have made the greatest progress in
professional development during his or her undergraduate career.
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF CHEMISTS AWARD. Awarded to an outstanding undergraduate student majoring in chemical engineering on the basis
of a demonstrated record of leadership, ability, character, scholastic
achievement, and potential for advancement of the chemical professions.
GREG A. ANDREWS MEMORIAL AWARD. Endowed in 1969 and
awarded to the senior in civil engineering who has been judged by the
faculty to have made the greatest progress in professional development
and who plans to do graduate work in environmental and water resources
engineering.
THOMAS G. ARNOLD PRIZE. Endowed in 1989 and awarded by the biomedical engineering faculty to the senior who presents the best design of
a biomedical engineering system or performance of a research project in
the application of engineering to a significant problem in biomedical science or clinical medicine.
WALTER CRILEY PAPER AWARD. Endowed in 1978 and awarded in
electrical engineering for the best paper on an advanced senior project in
electrical engineering.
JAMES SPENSER DAVIS AWARD. Given annually by the student chapter
of Eta Kappa Nu in memory of Mr. Davis, this award recognizes excellence
in the undergraduate study of electronics.
ARTHUR J. DYER JR. MEMORIAL PRIZE. Endowed in 1938 and awarded
in civil engineering to the member of the senior class doing the best work
in structural engineering.
WALTER GILL KIRKPATRICK PRIZE IN CIVIL ENGINEERING. Endowed
and awarded in the School of Engineering to the most deserving third-year
undergraduate student in civil engineering.

School of Engineering / Honors
WILLIAM A. MA AWARD. Awarded to an outstanding senior majoring in
chemical engineering on the basis of a demonstrated record of leadership
and scholastic achievement.
WILSON L. AND NELLIE PYLE MISER AWARD. Awarded to the senior
engineering student who has been judged by the faculty of mathematics
to have excelled in all aspects of mathematics during his or her undergraduate career.

295
ROBERT D. TANNER UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH AWARD. Awarded
to a senior who, in the judgment of the chemical engineering faculty,
has conducted at Vanderbilt University the best undergraduate research
project.
W. DENNIS THREADGILL AWARD. Awarded to a graduating chemical
engineering senior for outstanding achievement in the undergraduate program in honor of a former faculty member and department chair.

STEIN STONE MEMORIAL AWARD. Endowed in 1948 and awarded in the
School of Engineering to the member of the graduating senior class who
has earned a letter in sports, preferably in football, and who is adjudged
to have made the most satisfactory scholastic and extramural progress as
an undergraduate.

E

296

vanderbilt university

Academic Regulations
Honor System
All academic work at Vanderbilt is done under the honor
system (see Life at Vanderbilt chapter).
Responsibility to Be Informed
It is the responsibility of the student to keep informed of
course requirements and scheduling. Failure to do so may
jeopardize graduation.
Academic Advising
A faculty adviser is appointed for each student. This adviser is
chosen from the faculty in the student’s major, when the major
is known. For students who have not chosen a major upon
entry, an adviser is selected from faculty in any department. If
a student later chooses a different department for his or her
major, a corresponding change of adviser is made. Engineering students are required to see their advisers at registration
and any other time changes must be made in their programs
of study. Any student who has academic difficulty is expected
to see his or her faculty adviser for counsel. Faculty advisers
can also provide useful career guidance.
Professional Registration and Accreditation
Legislation exists in the various states requiring registration of
all engineers who contract with the public to perform professional work. Although many engineering positions do not
require professional certification, Vanderbilt supports registration and encourages its graduates to take the Fundamentals
of Engineering examination as soon as they become eligible.
Bachelor of engineering degrees in biomedical engineering,
chemical engineering, civil engineering, computer engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering are
accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission
of ABET (abet.org). Students in these programs may take
the Fundamentals of Engineering examination as seniors. In
addition, proven professional experience is a requirement for
registration. Other state boards may have different rules.
Graduate Record Examination
Most graduate schools, including Vanderbilt’s, require or
strongly encourage submission of Graduate Record Examination scores as a condition for admission. Further information
can be obtained by writing the Educational Testing Service,
Box 6000, Princeton, New Jersey 08540.
Credit Hour Definition
Credit hours are semester hours; e.g., a three-hour course
carries credit of three semester hours. One semester credit hour
represents at least three hours of academic work per week, on
average, for one semester. Academic work includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, lectures, laboratory work, homework,
research, class readings, independent study, internships, practica, studio work, recitals, practicing, rehearsing, and recitations.
Some Vanderbilt courses may have requirements which exceed

this definition. Certain courses (e.g., dissertation research,
ensemble, performance instruction, and independent study) are
designated as repeatable as they contain evolving or iteratively
new content. These courses may be taken multiple times for
credit. If a course can be repeated, the number of credits allowable per semester will be included in the course description.
Normal Course Load
Each semester, regular tuition is charged on the basis of a normal course load of 12 to 18 semester hours. No more than 18 or
fewer than 12 hours may be taken in any one semester without
authorization from the dean. There is an extra charge for more
than 18 hours at the current hourly rate. Students permitted to
take fewer than 12 hours are placed on probation, unless their
light load is necessary because of illness or outside employment.
A student must be enrolled in a minimum of 12 hours to be classified as a full-time student.
Grading System
Work is graded by letter. A, B, C, and D are considered passing
grades. The grade F signifies failure. A student who withdraws
from a course before the date given in the Academic Calendar
is given the grade W. A student may not withdraw from a
course after that date.

Grade Point Average
A student’s grade point average is obtained by dividing the total
grade points earned by the number of hours for which the student
registered, excluding courses taken for no credit, those from
which the student has withdrawn, those with the temporary grade
of I or M, and those that are completed with the grade Pass.

Defined Grades with Corresponding Grade Points Per
Credit Hour
A+ =
A
=
A– =
B+ =
B
=
B– =
		

4.0
4.0
3.7
3.3
3.0
2.7

C+
C
C–
D+
D
D–
F

=
=
=
=
=
=
=

2.3
2.0
1.7
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.0

Pass/Fail Course Provision
Students may elect to take a limited number of courses on
a Pass/Fail basis. To enroll for a course on a Pass/Fail basis,
students must have completed at least two semesters at
Vanderbilt, must have achieved at least sophomore standing,
and must not be on academic probation.
In addition, the following regulations apply to students
enrolled in the School of Engineering:
1. No more than 9 hours graded Pass will be accepted toward
the B.S. or B.E. degree, as designated by each program's
curriculum.

School of Engineering / Academic Regulations

297

M: Missed Final Examination

Pass/Fail Electives Options by Program
Open
Elective
BME
CEE		
ChBE
CMPE
CS
EE
ES
ME

Liberal		
Arts Core

X
X		
X		
X
X		
X
X

Technical
Elective

X
X
X			

X

X
X

X (non-ME)

2. No more than two courses may be taken on a Pass/Fail
basis in any one semester.
3. A minimum of 12 hours must be taken on a graded
basis in any semester that a Pass/Fail course is taken. A graduating senior who needs fewer than 12 hours to graduate may
take courses on a Pass/Fail basis as long as he or she takes the
number of hours needed to graduate on a graded basis.
4. Students may register for grading on a Pass/Fail basis
until the close of the Change Period at the end of the second
week of classes. Students may change from Pass/Fail to graded
status until the deadline date for dropping a course that is
published in the Academic Calendar.
Those electing the Pass/Fail option must meet all course
requirements (e.g., reports, papers, examinations, attendance,
etc.) and are graded in the normal way. Instructors are not
informed of the names of students enrolled on a Pass/Fail
basis. At the end of the semester, a regular grade is submitted
for the student enrolled under the P/F option. Any grade of
D- or above is converted in the Student Records System to a
P, while an F will be recorded if a student enrolled under this
option fails the course. The P grade is not counted in the grade
point average or used in the determination of honors. The
grade of F earned under the Pass/Fail option is included in the
calculation of the grade point average.

Temporary Grades
Temporary grades are placeholders that are assigned under
defined circumstances with a specified deadline by which
they will be replaced with a permanent grade. A student who
receives a temporary grade is ineligible for the Dean’s List.

I: Incomplete
The Incomplete (I) is a temporary placeholder for a grade that
will be submitted at a later date. The grade of I is given only
under extenuating circumstances and only when a significant
body of satisfactory work has been completed in a course. The I
is not intended as a replacement for a failing grade, nor should
it be assigned if a student simply misses the final examination.
The grade of M is used for the latter purpose. The request for
an I is generally initiated by the student but must be approved
and assigned by the instructor. When assigning an Incomplete,
the instructor specifies (a) a deadline by which the I must be
resolved and replaced by a permanent grade and (b) a default
course grade that counts the missing work as zero. The deadline may be no later than the end of the next regular semester.
Extension beyond that time must be approved by the associate
dean. If the work is not completed by the deadline the default
grade will become the permanent grade for the course. The
Incomplete is not calculated in the GPA, but a student who
receives an Incomplete is ineligible for the Dean’s List.

The grade of M is given to a student who misses the final
examination and is not known to have defaulted, provided the
student could have passed the course had the final examination been successfully completed. The grade of F is given
if the student could not pass the course even with the final
examination. It is the student’s responsibility to contact the
Office of the Dean before the first class day of the next regular
semester to request permission to take a makeup examination.
The makeup examination must be taken on or before the tenth
class day of the next regular semester. If the request has not
been submitted by the proper time, or if the student fails to
take the makeup examination within the prescribed time, the
M grade will be replaced by a default grade submitted by the
instructor when the M is assigned.

F: Failure
A subject in which the grade F is received must be taken again
in class before credit is given. A student who deserts a course
without following the correct procedure for dropping it will
receive an F in the course.
Senior Re-examination. A candidate for graduation who
fails not more than one course in the final semester may be
allowed one re-examination, provided the course failed prevents
the student’s graduation, and provided the student could pass
the course by passing a re-examination. Certain courses may
be excluded from re-examination. The re-examination must be
requested through the student’s Dean’s Office, and, if approved,
it is given immediately after the close of the last semester of the
student’s senior year. A student who passes the re-examination
will receive a D- in the course. The terms and administration of
senior re-examination are the responsibility of the school that
offers the course. For engineering students taking engineering
courses, the senior re-examination policy applies if a student
fails not more than one course in the senior year.

RC: The Repeated Course Designator
Courses in which a student has earned a grade lower than B–
may be repeated under certain conditions. A course in which
the student earned a grade between D– and C+, inclusive,
may be repeated only once. The repeat must be accomplished
within one year of the first attempt for courses offered every
year, or, for courses not offered within a year, the first time the
course is offered. Failed courses may be repeated at any time.
A course may be repeated only on a graded basis, even if the
course was originally taken Pass/Fail. Courses taken Pass/Fail
in which the student earned a Pass may not be repeated. When
registering for a course previously completed, the student
must indicate that the course is being repeated. A course cannot be repeated through credit by examination.
Students should note that repeating a course may improve the
grade point average, but it may also lead to problems in meeting
minimum hour requirements for class standing and progress
toward a degree. Repeating a course does not increase the number
of hours used in calculation of the grade point average. All grades
earned will be shown on the transcript, but only the latest grade
will be used for computation of grade point averages.

E

298

W: Withdrawal
A student may withdraw from a course at any time prior to the
deadline for withdrawal published in the Academic Calendar.
The deadline is usually the Friday following the date for reporting mid-semester deficiencies. The W is recorded for any course
from which a student withdraws. A course in which a W is
recorded is not used in figuring grade point averages.
Requirements for the Degree
Candidates for a degree must have completed satisfactorily all
curriculum requirements, have passed all prescribed examinations, and be free of indebtedness to the university.

Grade Average Requirements
To be eligible for graduation, a student must have passed all
required courses, including the technical electives, and shall
have earned a minimum average grade of C in (a) all courses
taken, (b) courses taken within the School of Engineering, and
(c) department courses of each major.
Any student who has been on probation for failure to meet
the semester grade point average requirements in two successive semesters may be dropped for failure to meet the requirement in a third successive semester.

Hours Required for Graduation
The specific course requirements and total hours required for
the bachelor’s degree vary with the student’s major program.
Detailed requirements for each program are shown in the
specimen curricula in the Courses of Study section. If graduation requirements change during the time students are in school,
they may elect to be bound by the requirements published in
the catalog in either their entering or their graduating year.
Transfer Credit
It is the student’s responsibility to provide all information
needed for an assessment of the program for which transfer
of credit is requested. Work transferred to Vanderbilt from
another institution will not carry with it a grade point average. No course in which a grade below C- was received will be
credited toward a degree offered by the School of Engineering.
Transfer students must complete at least 60 hours of work
at Vanderbilt. Two of the semesters must be the senior year.

Summer Work at Another Institution
Work that a student contemplates taking at a summer school
other than Vanderbilt is treated as transfer work and must be
approved in advance in writing by the student’s adviser and
the associate dean in the School of Engineering, at which time
a course description must be submitted. A course a student
has taken at Vanderbilt may not be repeated in another institution to obtain a higher grade.
Credit by Examination
In certain circumstances students may be awarded course
credit by departmental examination. (This procedure is
distinct from the award of credit through the College Board
Advanced Placement Examinations, taken prior to a student’s
first enrollment at Vanderbilt or another college.)

vanderbilt university

Students who want to earn credit by departmental examination should consult the associate dean concerning procedures. To be eligible, students must be in good standing.
Students must obtain the approval of the chair of the department that is to give the examination and of the instructor designated by the chair. Students may earn up to 8 hours of credit
by examination in any one department, although this limitation
might be raised on petition to the Administrative Committee.
Students may attempt to obtain credit by examination no more
than twice in one semester, no more than once in one course in
one semester, and no more than twice in one course.
Credit hours and grade are awarded on the basis of the
grade earned on the examination, subject to the policy of
the department awarding credit. Students have the option of
refusing to accept the credit hours and grade after learning the
results of the examination.
Students enrolled for at least 12 hours are not charged
tuition for hours for which credit by examination is awarded,
so long as the amount of credit falls within the allowable
limits of an 18-hour tuition load, including no-credit courses
dropped after the change period of registration. Students in
this category must pay a fee of $50 for the cost of administering the examination. Full-time students with a tuition load
exceeding 18 hours and students taking fewer than 12 hours
pay tuition at the regular rate with no additional fee.
Registration
A period is designated in each semester during which continuing students, after consultation with their advisers, register for
work to be taken during the next term. Students can access both
their registration appointment times and the registration system
via YES (Your Enrollment Services) at yes.vanderbilt.edu.
Auditing
Regularly enrolled students in the School of Engineering who
want to audit courses in any of the undergraduate schools of
the university must get the written consent of the instructor
to attend the class but do not register for the course for credit.
Forms are available from the School of Engineering Office of
Academic Services. No permanent record is kept of the audit.
Regular students may audit one class each semester.
Change of Course
During the change period of registration as defined in the
Academic Calendar, students may add or drop courses without
academic penalty after securing approval from their adviser.
After the change period, new courses may not be added, except
under very unusual circumstances and with the approval of
the adviser, the course instructor, and the associate dean.
A student may drop a course without entry on the final
record, provided the course is dropped during the change
period of registration. After the first week of classes and
extending to the end of the eighth week, a course may be
dropped with approval of the student’s adviser; a W (withdrawal) will be recorded.
To drop a course or change sections after the change
period ends, the student must procure a Change of Course
form from the Office of Academic Services. The student then
obtains the signature of his or her adviser and of all instructors
involved in the proposed change and returns the form to the
Office of Academic Services.

School of Engineering / Academic Regulations

Examinations
Examinations are usually given at the end of each semester
in all undergraduate courses except for certain laboratory
courses or seminars. Exams will be no longer than three hours
in length and are given according to the schedule published
in the Schedule of Courses (the School of Engineering does not
offer an alternate examination schedule). All examinations are
conducted under the honor system.
Residence Requirements
A minimum of four semesters including the last two semesters
shall be spent in residence in the School of Engineering. During these four or more semesters, the student must have completed at least 60 semester hours of an approved curriculum in
one of the degree programs. In unusual cases, an exception to
this requirement may be made by the Administrative Committee upon the recommendation of the department concerned.
Class Standing
To qualify for sophomore standing, a student must earn a minimum of 24 hours and maintain a grade point average of at least
1.8 and have completed two regular semesters. For the purposes
of class standing, a regular semester is defined as any fall or
spring term in which a student is registered for at least 12 hours.
Freshmen who fail to qualify for sophomore standing after two
semesters are placed on probation. Freshmen who fail to qualify
for sophomore standing in three semesters may be dropped.
The summer session counts as a semester for this purpose.
To qualify for junior standing, a student must earn a
minimum of 54 hours and maintain a grade point average of
at least 1.9 and have completed four regular semesters. Sophomores who fail to qualify for junior standing at the end of two
semesters after qualifying for sophomore standing are placed
on probation. A student who has been on probation for failure
to qualify for junior standing and who does not qualify for
junior standing in one extra semester may be dropped.
A student who has qualified for junior standing has two
semesters to qualify for senior standing. Senior standing
requires the completion of 86 hours and a minimum grade
point average of 2.0 and and the completion of six regular
semesters. Juniors who do not qualify for senior standing
at the end of the second semester after qualifying for junior
standing will be placed on probation. A student who has been
on probation for failure to qualify for senior standing and who
does not qualify for senior standing in one extra semester may
be dropped.
Seniors who do not qualify for graduation at the end of the
second semester after being promoted to the senior class will
be placed on pro­bation and given one more semester to complete the graduation requirements. A senior who has been on
probation for failing to complete the graduation requirements
and who fails to complete the requirements in one additional
semester may be dropped.
Probation
A freshman who fails to complete 9 hours and earn a 1.7 grade
point average during any semester is placed on probation. A
sophomore, junior, or senior who fails to complete 12 hours
and earn a 2.0 grade point average during any semester is
placed on probation. The student is removed from probation
after completing 12 hours and earning a 2.0 grade point average during any semester provided that sufficient credit hours
are obtained for promotion to the next class.

299

Full-time sophomores are removed from probation after
earning 12 hours and a 2.0 grade point average in a given
semester, except that those who have not qualified for junior
standing after two semesters as a sophomore must in the next
semester fulfill the requirement for junior standing. Failure to
do so will cause the student to be dropped.
A student who fails all courses in any semester will be
dropped.
To remain in good standing, a student must pursue a
program leading toward a degree in the School of Engineering.
A student who is deemed by the Administrative Committee
not to be making satisfactory progress toward a degree in
engineering will be dropped.
A student authorized by the Administrative Committee
to carry fewer than 12 hours because of illness or outside
employment, or for some other valid reason, may be placed
on probation if the student’s work is deemed unsatisfactory
by the Administrative Committee and will be removed from
probation when the committee deems the work satisfactory.
Class Attendance
Students are expected to attend all scheduled meetings of
each class in which they are enrolled. At the beginning of
each semester, instructors will explain the policy regarding
absences in each of their classes. Students having excessive
absences will be reported to the Office of the Dean. If class
attendance does not improve thereafter, the student may be
dropped from the class with the grade W, if passing at the time,
or the grade F, if failing at the time. Class attendance may be a
factor in determining the final grade in a course.
Scholarship Requirements
Those students having honor scholarships are expected to
maintain a 3.0 grade point average while taking a minimum
of 12 hours. Failure to maintain a 3.0 grade point average each
year will result in the cancellation of the scholarship.
Grade Reports
A grade report will be available to the student on Academic
Record in YES as soon as possible after the conclusion of each
semester. This report will give the total hours and grade points
earned during the semester, as well as the cumulative hours
and grade points earned through that semester. Students
should examine these reports carefully and discuss them with
their faculty advisers. Any errors should be reported immediately to the Office of Academic Services of the School of
Engineering.
A grade reported and recorded in the Office of the University Registrar may be changed only upon written request of the
instructor and with approval of the Administrative Committee.
The committee will approve such a change only on certification that the original report was in error.
Undergraduate Enrollment in Graduate Courses
A qualified Vanderbilt junior or senior may enroll in courses
approved for graduate credit by the graduate faculty. Credit
from such courses may be applied to undergraduate degree
requirements or, upon the student’s admission to the Vanderbilt University Graduate School, toward a graduate degree.
Vanderbilt cannot guarantee that another graduate school will
grant credit for such courses. The principles governing this
option are as follows:

E

300

1. Work taken under this option is limited to courses
numbered 5000 and above and listed in the catalog of the
Graduate School, excluding thesis and dissertation research
courses and similar individual research and reading
courses.
2. The student must, at the time of registration, have a 3.5
grade point average in the preceding two semesters.
3. The total course load, graduate and undergraduate courses,
must not exceed 18 hours in that semester.
4. The student must obtain the written approval of their academic adviser and the instructor of the course on a form
available in the Office of Academic Services.
5. Permission for Vanderbilt undergraduates to enroll in
graduate courses does not constitute a commitment on the
part of any program to accept the student as a graduate
student in the future.
6. An undergraduate student exercising this option will be
treated as a graduate student with regard to class requirements and grading standards.
Reserving Credit for Graduate School
1. Undergraduate students who want to count credit earned
in a course numbered 5000 and higher for graduate credit
must at the time of registration declare their intention on a
form available in the Office of Academic Services.
2. The work must be in excess of that required for the bachelor’s degree.
3. All of the criteria detailed above regarding the enrollment
by undergraduates in graduate courses apply under this
option.
Leave of Absence
A student at Vanderbilt or one who has been admitted to
Vanderbilt may, with the approval of his or her academic dean,
take an official leave of absence for as much as two semesters
and a summer session. Leave of absence forms are available in
the Office of Academic Services. A student who fails to register
in the university at the end of the leave will be withdrawn from
the university.
Change of Address
Any change of address should be reported to the School of
Engineering Office of Academic Services or the Office of the
University Registrar. The university will consider notices or
other information delivered if mailed to the address on file in
YES.
Normal Program of Study
The normal program of study is 12 to 18 hours per semester.
Students must be authorized by the Administrative Committee to register for fewer than 12 hours.
Withdrawal from the University
A student proposing to withdraw from the university must
notify the Office of Academic Services of the School of Engineering so that proper clearance may be accomplished and
that incomplete work is not charged as a failure against the
student’s record.

vanderbilt university

School of Engineering / Courses of Study

301

Courses of Study
Hours are semester hours. The bracketed [3] indicates
3 semester hours of credit for one semester, and [3–3]
for a two-semester course.

				

1000–1999: Lower-level introductory courses. Generally no prerequisite.
2000–2999: Intermediate undergraduate courses. May have prerequisite
courses.
3000–4999: Upper-level undergraduate course. Usually have prerequisite
courses.
5000+: Courses for graduate credit.
W symbols used in course numbers designate courses that meet
departmental writing requirements.

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		

BME
CE
CHBE
CMPE
CS
EECE
ENGM
ES
ENVE
ME
MSE
NANO
SC

Abbreviations

Biomedical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
Computer Engineering
Computer Science
Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering
Engineering Management
Engineering Science
Environmental Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Materials Science and Engineering
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
Scientific Computing

The Freshman Year
The freshman year curriculum for all of the engineering disciplines is:

E

Specimen Curriculum
FALL SEMESTER					
CHEM 1601
CHEM 1601L
MATH 1300
ES 1401–1403
		

Semester hours

General Chemistry						
General Chemistry Laboratory				
Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus I			
Introduction to Engineering				
Elective						

3
1
4
3
3

							___

							

Total

14

SPRING SEMESTER					

Semester hours

CHEM 1602‡
General Chemistry						
3
and
and
CHEM 1602L
General Chemistry Laboratory				
1
or
or
MSE 1500‡
Materials Science I						
3
and
and
MSE 1500L
Materials Science Laboratory				
1
MATH 1301
Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus II			
4
PHYS 1601
General Physics I						
3
PHYS 1601L
General Physics Laboratory I				
1
ES 1001
Engineering Commons Seminar (optional)			
1
CS 1101
Programming and Problem Solving			
3
or 1103		
				___
							
Total
15–16
‡ Chemical engineering and biomedical engineering majors must take CHEM 1602 and 1602L.
Civil engineering majors must take an area of science in addition to chemistry and physics to satisfy
the program basic science elective requirements.

302

vanderbilt university

Biomedical Engineering
CHAIR Michael R. King
ASSOCIATE CHAIR W. David Merryman
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Anita Mahadevan-Jansen
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Cynthia Reinhart-King
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE RECRUITING Craig L. Duvall
PROFESSORS EMERITI A. B. Bonds, Robert L. Galloway, Jr., Thomas R.
Harris, Paul H. King, Robert J. Roselli, Richard G. Shiavi
PROFESSORS Adam W. Anderson, Daniel Brown, André Churchwell,
Benoit M. Dawant, Mark D. Does, Todd D. Giorgio, John C. Gore,
Scott A. Guelcher, Paul Harris, Frederick R. Haselton, S. Duke Herrell,
E. Duco Jansen, Michael R. King, Robert F. Labadie, Anita MahadevanJansen, Karen Joos, H. Charles Manning, Michael I. Miga, Reed Omary,
K. Arthur Overholser, Leon Partain, Cynthia Reinhart-King, James West,
John P. Wikswo, Jr.
RESEARCH PROFESSOR Andre Diedrich
ADJOINT PROFESSOR Richard Mu
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Franz J. Baudenbacher, Edward Y.
Chekmenev, Bruce M. Damon, Edwin Donnelly, Craig L. Duvall, William
Fissell, Bennett A. Landman, W. David Merryman, Victoria L. Morgan,
Jeffry S. Nyman, Cynthia B. Paschal, Wellington Pham, John J. Reese,
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Matthew Walker III
RESEARCH ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Daniel J. France, Lisa McCrawley
ADJOINT ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Stacy S. Klein-Gardner
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Leon Bellan, Brett C. Byram, James Cassat,
Charles Caskey, Rebecca Cook, Zhaohua Ding, Dario Englot, William
Grissom, Giresh Hiremath, Ethan Lippmann, Carlos Lopez, Gregor
Neuert, Aron Parekh, Seth A. Smith, Julie Sterling, Hak-Joon Sung,
Wesley Thayer, Yuankai Tao, Eric R. Tkaczyk, Justin Turner, Brian
Welch, John T. Wilson, Junzhong Xu, Karl Zelik
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Amanda R. Lowery,
Christina C. Marasco, Joseph Schlesinger
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Nick Adams, Zhipeng Cao,
Cynthia Clark, Logan Clements, Richard Dortch, Yirui Gao, Mukesh
Gupta, Kevin Harkins, Dmitry Markov, Baxter P. Rogers, Patricia K.
Russ, Veniamin Sidorov, Eric Spivey, Jared Weis
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Valerie Guenst
ADJOINT ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Amber Simpson, Melissa C. Skala
ADJOINT RESEARCH PROFESSOR Justin Baba
INSTRUCTOR Amanda Buck

THE foundations of biomedical engineering are the same as those
in other engineering disciplines: mathematics, physics, chemistry
and engineering principles. Biomedical engineering builds on
these foundations to solve problems in biology and medicine over
the widest range of scales-from the nanoscale and molecular
levels to the whole body. Biomedical engineering provides a robust
platform for employment in the medical device and instrumentation industries as well as careers in companies that specialize
in the development and application of biologics, biomaterials,
implants and processes. Our graduates gain entry into nationally
recognized graduate schools for continuing studies in biomedical
engineering. Biomedical engineering is also a rigorous path for
admission to and success in medical school for those students
willing and able to excel in mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, physiology, and engineering.
The Department of Biomedical Engineering at Vanderbilt is
unique among biomedical engineering programs in its immediate
proximity to the world class Vanderbilt Medical Center, located
on our compact campus. Our School of Medicine is among the
top ten in funding from the National Institutes of Health and
includes a National Cancer Institute-recognized Comprehensive
Cancer Center, a major children’s hospital and a Level I trauma
center. This proximity and the strong relationships among
faculty across multiple schools stimulate high impact research

and provide unique educational and research opportunities for
students.
Degree Programs. The Department of Biomedical Engineering
offers courses of study leading to the B.E., M.S., M.Eng., and Ph.D.
Vanderbilt biomedical engineering is a well established program
with undergraduate degrees granted continuously since 1965. Our
undergraduate curriculum undergoes regular review and revision
to ensure relevancy and to maintain full ABET accreditation.
Students have complete flexibility in the selection of biomedical engineering, technical, and open electives. This allows focus
and depth in areas such as biomaterials and tissue engineering,
biomedical imaging, biophotonics, bionanotechnology, modeling, therapy guidance systems, and biomedical instrumentation.
Double majors with electrical engineering and with chemical
engineering are available.
Facilities. The Department of Biomedical Engineering is
located in Stevenson Center. Undergraduate instructional laboratories are equipped for study of biomedical processes, measurement
methods and instrumentation. These facilities are equipped with
embedded systems for instrumentation, design, and testing that
mirror professional practice. Specialized facilities for biomedical
imaging, biophotonics, surgery and engineering, regenerative
medicine, nanobiotechnology, and nanomedicine are used both for
faculty-led research and instructional purposes.
Undergraduate Honors Program. With approval of the Honors Program director, junior and senior students in biomedical engineering who have achieved a minimum grade point
average of 3.5 may be accepted into the undergraduate Honors
Program. Students in the program take at least 6 credit hours of
5000-level or above (graduate) biomedical engineering courses,
which can be counted toward the 127-hour undergraduate
degree requirements as biomedical engineering electives or
which can be taken for graduate school credit. Students in the
Honors Program must also complete a two-semester-long
research project and present a research report; this is generally
accomplished through the BME 3860 and 3861 Undergraduate
Research elective courses. Honors students must make a grade
point average of 3.0 in these classes and maintain an overall
3.5 GPA to be designated as an honors graduate. The diploma
designation is Honors in Biomedical Engineering.

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The B.E. in biomedical engineering requires a minimum of 127
hours, distributed as follows:
1. Mathematics (15 hours): MATH 1300, 1301, 2300, 2400.
2. Basic Science (20 hours): CHEM 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L;
PHYS 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L; BSCI 1510/1510L.
3. Introductory engineering and computing (6 hours): ES 1401,
1402, and 1403, and either CS 1103 (preferred) or CS 1101.
4. Electrical engineering (7 hours): EECE 2112, 2213, 2213L.
5. Biomedical engineering (31 hours): BME 2100, 2200, 3000,
3100, 3101, 3200, 3300, 4900W, 4950, 4951, 4959.
6. Biomedical engineering electives (12 hours) comprising:
		

i) BME elective courses numbered 2210 and higher.

		
ii) Up to 3 hours total of BME 3860, 3861. An additional 3
hours of BME 3860-3861 may be used as technical electives.

303

School of Engineering / Biomedical Engineering

		
iii) Any one of the following: CHBE 4500, 4810, 4870;
EECE 3214, 4353, 4354; ENVE 4610; ME 2220. This option
does not apply to BME/EE double majors.
		
iv) BME graduate courses, with the exception of
BME 8991–8994, provided the student has a 3.5 GPA and
appropriate permissions.

Double Majors
I. The double major in biomedical and electrical engineering
requires a minimum of 129 semester hours. The requirements include those numbered 1, 2, 3, 5, and 8 for the B.E. in
biomedical engineering and the following:
a. Biomedical engineering electives (3 hours): BME elective
courses numbered 2210 and higher.

7. Technical electives (12 hours) comprising:
		
i) BME electives taken above the 12 credit hour minimum. Up to 3 hours of BME 3860–3861 or other independent study courses in the School of Engineering may be
taken as technical electives.

b. Electrical engineering (21 hours): EECE 2112, 2116, 2116L,
2213, 2213L, 3214, 3233, 3235, 3235L.
c. Electrical engineering electives (15 hours) selected as
described by item 6 of the Curriculum Requirements in the
electrical engineering section of the catalog, but totaling at
least 15 hours. Students must complete at least two courses
in each of two areas of concentration listed under electrical engineering in the Undergraduate Catalog. At least one
course must be a domain expertise course as designated
in the catalog. BME 3300 may be included toward satisfying the area of concentration requirement but cannot be
counted as an electrical engineering elective.

		
ii) Courses in the School of Engineering except CHBE
3300, CE 2200, CS 1151, ENGM 2440, ME 2171, and listings
in Engineering Science.
		
iii) Courses numbered 2000 or higher in the College
of Arts and Science listed in the mathematics and natural
sciences (MNS) AXLE distribution category except MATH
2610, 2810, 2820, 3000, and PHYS 2805 (if credit is given for
BME 4400).
		

iv) BSCI 1511, 1511L.

		

v) NURS 1500, 1601-1602, 5105.

8. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours) to be selected to fulfill the Liberal Arts Core requirements listed under Degree Programs
in Engineering.
9. Open electives (6 hours).

A specimen curriculum for the double major with electrical
engineering can be found on the biomedical engineering
department's website.
II. The double major in biomedical and chemical engineering
requires a minimum of 131 hours and is described in the
chemical engineering section of the catalog under its curriculum requirements.

Undergraduates in biomedical engineering may apply the pass/
fail option only to courses taken as liberal arts core or open
electives, subject to school requirements for pass/fail.

Specimen Curriculum for Biomedical Engineering
		
SOPHOMORE YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

BSCI 1510, 1510L
BME 2100
BME 2200
MATH 2300
MATH 2400
PHYS 1602, 1602L
EECE 2112

4
3
–
3
–
4
–
–
3
___
17

–
–
3
–
4
–
3
4
3
___
17

3
3
–
–
4
3
–
3
___
16

–
3
3
4
–
4
3
–
___
17

Introduction to Biological Sciences with Laboratory
Introductory Biomechanics
Biomedical Materials
Multivariable Calculus
Differential Equations with Linear Algebra
General Physics with Laboratory II
Circuits I
Biomedical Engineering or Technical Elective
Liberal Arts Core
		
		
JUNIOR YEAR		
BME 3000
BME 3100, 3101
BME 3200
BME 3300
EECE 2213, 2213L

Physiological Transport Phenomena
Systems Physiology
Analysis of Biomedical Data
Biomedical Instrumentation*
Circuits II
Biomedical Engineering or Technical Elective
Liberal Arts Core
Open Elective
		
		

E

304

vanderbilt university

		
SENIOR YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING		

BME 4900W
BME 4950, 4951
BME 4959

3
2
1
7
3
–
___
16

Biomedical Engineering Laboratory
Design of Biomedical Engineering Systems I, II
Senior Engineering Design Seminar
Biomedical Engineering or Technical Elective
Liberal Arts Core
Open Elective
		
		

–
3
–
6
3
3
___
15

* BME 3300 may also be taken in the fall of the senior year.

Course descriptions begin on page 325.

Chemical Engineering
CHAIR G. Kane Jennings
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE PROGRAM Clare M. McCabe
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Paul E. Laibinis
PROFESSORS EMERITI Thomas R. Harris, M. Douglas LeVan, Robert J.
Roselli, John A. Roth, Karl B. Schnelle Jr., Robert D. Tanner
PROFESSORS Peter T. Cummings, Todd D. Giorgio, Scott A. Guelcher,
G. Kane Jennings, David S. Kosson, Paul E. Laibinis, Matthew J.
Lang, Clare M. McCabe, K. Arthur Overholser, Peter N. Pintauro,
Sandra J. Rosenthal
PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Russell F. Dunn, Julie E. Sharp
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR EMERITUS Kenneth A. Debelak
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Eva M. Harth, Bridget R. Rogers, Jamey D.
Young
RESEARCH ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Ryszard Wycisk
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Rizia Bardhan, Kelsey B. Hatzell, Piran Kidambi,
Shihong Lin, Ethan S. Lippmann, Carlos A. Silvera Batista, John T.
Wilson, Marija Zanic
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Christopher R. Iacovella
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSORS William R. French, Davide Vanzo
ADJUNCT INSTRUCTOR Bryan R. Beyer

CHEMICAL engineers play key roles in the development and
production of commodity chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and
bioengineered materials, high strength composites and specialty polymers, semiconductors and microelectronic devices,
and a wide range of ultrapure fine chemicals. Indeed, chemical
engineering is essential for the operation of contemporary
society. The solutions to many of the problems that we face
today—e.g., energy, the environment, development of highperformance materials—will involve chemical engineers.
The undergraduate program in chemical engineering prepares students to contribute to the solution of these and similar
problems. Graduates find meaningful careers in industry, in
government laboratories, and as private consultants. Some
continue their education through graduate studies in chemical
engineering, business, law, or medicine.
Mission. The mission of the Department of Chemical
and Biomolecular Engineering is to educate those who will
advance the knowledge base in chemical engineering, become
practicing chemical engineers, and be leaders in the chemical
and process industries, academia, and government; to conduct
both basic and applied research in chemical engineering and
related interdisciplinary areas; and to provide service to the
chemical engineering profession, the School of Engineering,
Vanderbilt University, the country, and the world.
Degree Programs. The Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering offers the bachelor of engineering in chemical
engineering and graduate study leading to the M.Eng., M.S., and Ph.D.

Undergraduate chemical engineering students acquire a solid
background in mathematics, chemistry, biology, and physics. The
chemical and biomolecular engineering program has as its basis
courses in transport phenomena, thermodynamics, separations, and kinetics. Other courses deal with the principles and
techniques of chemical engineering analysis and design, along
with economic analysis, process control, chemical process safety,
and engineering ethics. Laboratory courses offer the student an
opportunity to make fundamental measurements of momentum,
heat, and mass transport and to gain hands-on experience with
bench scale and small scale pilot-plant apparatus, which can be
computer controlled. Report writing is a principal focus in the
laboratory courses. Many students have the opportunity to carry
out individual research projects.
A specimen curriculum for a chemical engineering major
follows. This standard program includes a number of electives. Students, in consultation with their faculty advisers, may
choose elective courses that maintain program breadth or may
pursue a minor or focus area with their chemical engineering
major. Specimen curricula with emphases in specific areas are
available on the department website. Double majors may be
arranged in consultation with a faculty adviser.
The chemical and biomolecular engineering department
recommends that students consider taking the Fundamentals
of Engineering Examination (FE) in their senior year. This is
the first step in obtaining a license as a professional engineer.
The following courses are recommended for preparation for
the FE: EECE 2112, CE 2280, and ME 2190.
Undergraduate Honors Program. The Honors Program
in chemical engineering provides an opportunity for selected
students to develop individually through independent study
and research. General requirements are described in the Special
Programs chapter. The chemical and biomolecular engineering
department requires a minimum overall GPA of 3.5. Acceptance
to the program is made by petition to the faculty during the junior
year. Transfer students may be considered for admission after
completing one semester at Vanderbilt. Candidates for honors
choose their technical courses with the consent of a faculty honors
adviser. Requirements include at least 6 hours of CHBE courses
numbered 5000 or above, plus 6 hours of CHBE 3860 and 3861
taken in the junior and/or senior year under the direction of a faculty honors adviser. A formal written research report is submitted
each semester CHBE 3860 or 3861 is taken with a final report and
presentation given in the spring semester of the senior year to the
CHBE faculty and students. The diploma designation is Honors in
Chemical Engineering.
Facilities. The chemical and biomolecular engineering
department is located in Olin Hall of Engineering. Departmental laboratories are equipped for study of transport phenomena,
unit operations, kinetics, and process control. Current research

School of Engineering / Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering

areas for which facilities are available include molecular modeling; adsorption and surface chemistry; biochemical engineering
and biotechnology; materials; energy and the environment.

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The B.E. in chemical engineering requires a minimum of 126
hours, distributed as follows:
1. Mathematics (14 hours): MATH 1300, 1301, 2300, 2420.

305

Undergraduates in chemical engineering, including double
majors with chemical engineering, may apply the pass/fail option
only to courses taken as open electives, subject to the school
requirements for pass/fail. No more than 6 total hours of CHBE
3860 and 3861 may be applied toward degree requirements.
Double Majors
I. The double major in chemical engineering and biomedical
engineering requires a minimum of 131 semester hours. The
requirements include those numbered 2, 3, and 4 for the B.E.
in chemical engineering and the following:

2. Basic Science (24 hours): CHEM 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L,
2221/2221L, 2222/2222L; PHYS 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L.

a) Mathematics (15 hours): MATH 1300, 1301, 2300, 2400.

3. Engineering Fundamentals (6 hours): ES 1401, 1402, 1403;
CS 1103.

c) Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (26 hours):
CHBE 2100, 2200, 3200, 3250, 3300, 3350, 3900W, 4950W.

4. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours). To be selected to fulfill the
Liberal Arts Core requirements listed in the Degree Programs in Engineering.

d) Biomedical Engineering (25 hours): BME 2100, 2200,
3100, 3101, 3300, 4900W, 4950, 4951, 4959.

5. Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (39 hours): CHBE
2100, 2200, 2250, 3200, 3250, 3300, 3350, 3600, 3900W,
4900W, 4950W, 4951W, 4959.

f) CHBE elective: 3 hours selected from CHBE 4500, 4810, 4820.

6. Science electives (6 hours): BSCI 1510 or CHBE 2150;
CHEM 3300 (preferred) or BSCI 2201 or BSCI 2520.
7. Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering electives: 6 hours
selected from CHBE courses numbered 4000 and above.
8. Technical electives (6 hours). To be selected from: a)
courses in BME, CHBE, CE, CS, EECE, ENVE, ME, MSE,
NANO, and SC, except BME 2201 and CS 1151; b) courses
numbered 1500 or above in the College of Arts and Science
listed in the mathematics and natural sciences (MNS)
AXLE distribution category; and c) ENGM 2160, 3000, 3010,
3100, 3300, 3650, 3700, 4500.

b) Biology (4 hours): BSCI 1510, 1510L.

e) Electrical Engineering (7 hours): EECE 2112, 2213, 2213L.
g) BME elective: 3 hours selected from BME courses numbered
above 2000 except BME 2201, 3000, 3200, 6110, 8991–8994.
II. The double major in chemical engineering and chemistry
requires a minimum of 130 semester hours. The requirements include those numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, and 7 for the B.E. in
chemical engineering and the following:

9. Open electives (7 hours).

a) Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (36 hours):
CHBE 2100, 2200, 2250, 3200, 3250, 3300, 3350, 3900W,
4950W, 4951W, 4959; CHBE 3600 or 4830.
b) Science (23 hours): CHEM 2100, 2100L, 3010, 3300, 3315,
4965, 4966; BSCI 1510 or CHBE 2150; BSCI 2520.
c) Engineering Elective: 3 hours selected from courses
numbered 2000-3800 or 3890 and above in BME, CHBE,
CE, EECE, ENVE, and ME, except BME 2201 and 3830.

Specimen Curriculum for Chemical Engineering
		
SOPHOMORE YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

CHEM 2221, 2222
CHEM 2221L, 2222L
MATH 2300
MATH 2420
PHYS 1602
PHYS 1602L
CHBE 2100
CHBE 2200
CHBE 2250

3
1
3
–
3
1
3
–
–
3

3
1
–
3
–
–
–
3
3
3

17

16

Organic Chemistry
Organic Chemistry Laboratory
Multivariable Calculus
Methods of Ordinary Differential Equations
General Physics II
General Physics Laboratory II
Chemical Process Principles
Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
Modeling and Simulation in Chemical Engineering
Liberal Arts Core

										___
		

___

E

306

vanderbilt university

		
JUNIOR YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

CHBE
CHBE
CHBE
CHBE
CHBE
CHBE
CHBE

3
3
–
3
–
–
–
3
3

–
–
3
–
3
3
4
–
3

		

15

16

SENIOR YEAR		

FALL

SPRING

CHBE
CHBE
CHBE
CHBE

3
4
–
1
3
–
3
3
___
17

–
–
3
–
3
3
3
4
___
16

2150
3200
3250
3300
3350
3600
3900W

Molecular and Cell Biology for Engineers
Phase Equilibria and Stage-Based Separations
Chemical Reaction Engineering
Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer
Mass Transfer and Rate-Based Separations
Chemical Process Control
Chemical Engineering Laboratory I
Science Elective: CHEM 3300 (preferred), BSCI 2201, or BSCI 2520
Liberal Arts Core

										___

4900W
4950W
4951W
4959

Chemical Engineering Laboratory II
Chemical Engineering Process and Product Design
Chemical Engineering Design Projects
Senior Engineering Design Seminar
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Elective
Liberal Arts Core
Technical Elective
Open Elective
		
		

___

Specimen curricula for the double majors with biomedical engineering and with chemistry can be found on the department’s website.
Course descriptions begin on page 328.

Civil Engineering
CHAIR Douglas E. Adams
ASSOCIATE CHAIR Florence Sanchez
DIRECTORS OF GRADUATE STUDIES Caglar Oskay (Civil Engineering),
Florence Sanchez (Environmental Engineering)
DIRECTORS OF GRADUATE RECRUITING Hiba Baroud (Civil
Engineering), Shihong Lin (Environmental Engineering)
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Robert E. Stammer, Jr.
PROFESSORS EMERITI Paul Harrawood, Peter G. Hoadley, Hugh F.
Keedy, Frank L. Parker, John A. Roth, Karl B. Schnelle, Jr., Richard E.
Speece, Robert E. Stammer, Jr., Edward L. Thackston
PROFESSORS Mark D. Abkowitz, Douglas E. Adams, Prodyot K. Basu,
David J. Furbish, George M. Hornberger, David S. Kosson, Eugene J.
Leboeuf, Sankaran Mahadevan
PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Curtis D. Byers, James H. Clarke, Sanjiv
Gokhale, Steven L. Krahn, Judson Newbern, Robert E. Stammer, Jr.
RESEARCH PROFESSOR Craig E. Philip
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Alan R. Bowers, Jonathan Gilligan, Caglar
Oskay, Florence Sanchez
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Lori A. Troxel, John R.
Veillette
RESEARCH ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Kevin G. Brown, Janey S.
Camp, Andrew G. Garrabrants
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Hiba Baroud, Ravindra Duddu, Shihong Lin
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Mazita Mohd Tahir
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Zhen Hu
ADJUNCT PROFESSORS Michael B. Bye, Gregory L. Cashion, Ann N.
Clarke, Allen G. Croff, James P. Dobbins, Boualem Hadjenoun, Vic L.
McConnell, Michael T. Ryan, L. Hampton Turner IV, Hans A. Van der
Sloot, Raymond G. Wymer

VANDERBILT’S Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering offers a broad-based education in civil and environmental

engineering fundamentals, coupled with development of leadership, management, and communications skills to establish a foundation for lifelong learning and flexible career development. This
goal requires going beyond technical competence in a balanced
education to develop future leaders in the fields of consulting,
industry, business, law, government, and research. Civil engineers
must be able to face complex problems of modern society involving the development of physical facilities that serve the public
while protecting the environment and preserving social values.
Challenges facing civil and environmental engineers concern
housing, urban transportation, pollution control, water resources
development, industrial development, maintaining and advancing
our nation’s aging infrastructure, and exploring space. Addressing
these challenges with today’s limited resources requires innovative
and original ideas from highly-skilled engineers.
Undergraduates majoring in civil engineering receive a strong
background in mathematics, science, engineering science, and
engineering design. The program also includes courses in economics, humanities, social sciences, resources management, and
public policy. Students participate in design teams and laboratory
studies as well as classroom activities. Use of various computerbased methods is integral to problem solving and design.
Degree Programs. At the undergraduate level, the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering offers the B.E. in
civil engineering. The curriculum includes upper-level analysis
and design courses in structural, geotechnical, environmental,
water resources, and transportation engineering. In addition, a
major in chemical engineering with a minor in environmental
engineering is available.
Vanderbilt’s B.E. in civil engineering prepares students for
entry-level positions in many specialty areas of civil engineering, as well as many other types of careers, such as business,
construction, and law. Today, however, and even more so in

School of Engineering / Civil Engineering

the future, professional practice at a high level will require an
advanced degree. We recommend that students seriously consider pursuing the M.S. or M. Eng. soon after obtaining the B.E.
At the graduate level, the department educates leaders
in infrastructure and environmental engineering research
and practice, with emphasis on the use of reliability and risk
management. Reliability and risk management includes engineering design, uncertainty analysis, construction and repair,
life-cycle and cost-benefit analysis, information management,
and fundamental phenomena intrinsic to the understanding of
advanced infrastructure and environmental systems. Example
applications include performance, reliability and safety of
structures, restoration of contaminated sites, transportation
control systems, management of environmental resources, and
enhancement of the eco-compatibility of industry. Development and application of advanced information systems as
applied to civil and environmental engineering needs is an
important part of the program.
The graduate program in civil engineering offers the M.S.
and Ph.D., with emphasis in the areas of structural engineering
and mechanics and transportation engineering.
The graduate program in environmental engineering offers
the M.S. and Ph.D. in the areas of environmental engineering
and environmental science, with emphasis in water resources,
quality, and treatment; resilience and sustainability; nuclear
environmental engineering; and environmental materials and
materials durability. Both thesis and non-thesis options are
available at the M.S. level.
The graduate programs in both civil engineering and
environmental engineering also offer the master of engineering
(M.Eng.), an advanced professional degree especially designed
for practicing engineers wanting to pursue post-baccalaureate
study on a part-time basis, and for engineers seeking greater
emphasis on engineering design as part of graduate education.
B.E./M.Eng. Five Year Program. Students seeking advanced
study in civil and environmental engineering may be interested
in the combined B.E./M.Eng., enabling students to complete
the B.E. in civil engineering and M.Eng. in civil engineering or
environmental engineering in five years.
Construction Management Five Year Program. Students
seeking advanced study in construction management may be
particularly interested in the combined B.E./M.Eng., enabling
students to complete the B.E. in civil engineering and M.Eng.
in civil engineering (construction management emphasis) in
five years.
Undergraduate Honors Program. Recognized with the
diploma designation Honors in Civil Engineering, exceptional
students may be invited in their junior year to participate in
the civil engineering Honors Program. Designed as a unique
individualized educational experience, participants work
closely with departmental faculty members to tailor a selection of courses that actively immerses them in a selected
field of study. Experiences include enrollment in a 3 semester
hour independent study course and participation in a summer research internship. Honors Program participants are
especially well-prepared to enter graduate study, and they
may count the independent study course towards their civil
engineering technical electives.
Facilities. The civil engineering laboratory provides for
static and dynamic testing of materials and structural components and assemblies. Testing facilities include capabilities
of testing composites, metals, and concrete under static loads,
fatigue, base acceleration (to simulate seismic events) and
intermediate to high speed impacts (to simulate responses to

307

blast events). Full soils testing facilities are available. Hydraulics facilities include several model flow systems to illustrate
principles of fluid mechanics and hydrology. The transportation laboratory is computer-based, with emphasis on transportation systems and design, intelligent transportation systems,
and geographic information systems.
The environmental laboratories are fully supplied with
modern instrumentation for chemical, physical, biological,
and radiological analysis of soils, sediments, water, wastewater,
air, and solid waste. They include equipment for the study of
biological waste treatment, physical-chemical waste treatment,
contaminant mass transfer, and state-of-the-art instrumentation for gas and liquid chromatography, mass spectroscopy,
atomic absorption spectroscopy, gamma spectroscopy, inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy, gas adsorption (for
pore structure determination), thermal mechanical analysis,
modulated scanning differential calorimetry, and simultaneous
thermal gravimetric analysis differential scanning calorimetry/
mass spectroscopy. All are available for student use in courses,
demonstrations, and research.

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The B.E. in civil engineering requires a minimum of 125 hours,
distributed as follows:
1. Mathematics (14 hours). Required courses: MATH 1300, 1301,
2300, 2420.
2. Basic science (12 hours). Required courses: CHEM
1601/1601L; PHYS 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L.
3. Basic science elective (4 hours). To be selected from: (a)
Biological Sciences courses numbered 1510 and above; (b)
Earth and Environmental Sciences 1030, 1030L, 1510, 1510L,
3250, 3260, 3330, 3340; and (c) Materials Science and Engineering courses except MSE 3850, 3851, 3889, 3890.
4. Computing (3 hours). Required course: CS 1101 or CS 1103.
5. Engineering Fundamentals (26 hours). Required courses: ES
1401, 1402, 1403; CE 2101, 2200, 2205, 3700, 3700L; ENGM
2160; ME 2190; MSE 2205; ME 2220 or CHBE 2200 (students
with interests in Environmental and Infrastructure Sustainability Engineering are encouraged to enroll in CHBE 2200).
6. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours). To be selected to fulfill the Liberal Arts Core requirements listed under Degree Programs
in Engineering.
7. Open electives (6 hours).
8. Technical electives (3 hours). To be selected from: (a) all courses
in BME, CHBE, CE, ENVE, EECE, ME, and ENGM 3000, 3010,
3200, 3650; (b) all courses acceptable as science electives as
indicated above; (c) CHEM 1602 and above; (d) PHYS courses
above 2000 (astronomy not accepted); and (e) MATH 2410 or
MATH 2600, and courses 2811 and above (except 3000). Students with an interest in Structural Engineering are encouraged
to take MATH 2410 or MATH 2600 as their technical elective.
9. Civil Engineering Core (27 hours). Required courses: CE 2120,
3100W, 3200, 3205, 3300, 3501, 3705, 4400, 4950, 4951, and 4959.
10. Civil Engineering Program Electives (6 hours). To be
selected from: CE 3250, CE 3600, CE 4250, or ENVE 4615.

E

308

11. Civil Engineering Design Electives (6 hours). To be selected
from: CE 4150, 4200, 4210, 4240, 4250, 4425, 4430, 4500,
4505, 4510; ENVE 4305, 4610, 4625, 4710; CHBE 4899.
Students may use CE program electives, CE design electives,
technical electives, and open electives to gain additional depth
and expertise. Students with interests in structural engineering are recommended to take electives such as CE 3250, 4200,
4210, 4211, 4250, 4300, ENVE 4305, and ME 4259, 4275. Students
interested in environmental and infrastructure sustainability
engineering are recommended to take electives such as CE

vanderbilt university

3600, 4100, 4150, 4240, 4300, ENVE 4305, 4600, 4605, 4610,
4615, 4620, 4700, 4705, 4707, 4710, 4715, 4716, 4720, and CHBE
4899. Specific courses selections should be discussed with their
academic adviser. Students desiring advanced topic coverage
should also consider 5000-level courses, with approval of their
adviser.
Undergraduates in civil engineering may apply the pass/fail
option only to courses taken toward satisfying the liberal arts
core, subject to the school requirements for pass/fail.

Specimen Curriculum for Civil Engineering
		
SOPHOMORE YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

MATH 2300
PHYS 1602
PHYS 1602L
CE 2101
CE 2120
CE 2200
MATH 2420
CE 2205
CE 3501
ME 2190

Multivariable Calculus
General Physics II
General Physics Laboratory II
Civil and Environmental Engineering Information Systems
Sustainable Design in Civil Engineering
Statics
Methods of Ordinary Differential Equations
Mechanics of Materials
Transportation Systems Engineering
Dynamics
Thermodynamics (ME 2220 or CHBE 2200)
Liberal Arts Core
		
		
JUNIOR YEAR		

3
3
1
3
3
3
–
–
–
–
–
–
___
16

–
–
–
–
–
–
3
3
3
3
3
3
___
18

CE 3200
CE 3700
CE 3700L
MSE 2205

3
3
1
1
3
3
3
–
–
–
–
–
___
17

–
–
–
–
–
–
3
2
3
3
3
3
___
17

Structural Analysis
Fluid Mechanics
Fluid Mechanics Laboratory
Strength and Structure of Engineering Materials
CE Program Elective
Elective*
Liberal Arts Core
CE 3100W
Civil and Environmental Engineering Laboratory
CE 3205
Structural Design
CE 3300
Risk, Reliability, and Resilience Engineering
CE 3705
Water Resources Engineering
ENGM 2160
Engineering Economy
		
		
SENIOR YEAR		
CE 4400
CE 4950
CE 4959

Construction Project Management
3
–
Civil Engineering Design I
1
–
Senior Engineering Design Seminar
1
–
CE Design Elective
3
3
Elective*
3
3
Liberal Arts Core
3
3
CE 4951
Civil Engineering Design II
–
2
Open Elective
–
3
		
___
___
		
14
14
*To be selected toward satisfying the following degree requirements: 6 hours of Program Electives, 3 hours of Technical Electives,
and 6 hours of Open Electives.

School of Engineering / Computer Engineering

Pre-Architecture Program
Civil engineering students interested in pursuing architecture at
the graduate level should include courses that emphasize a broad
sense of art and architectural history, including courses in studio
art. Before applying to graduate programs, students will need
to develop a portfolio of creative work that generally includes
drawing, prints, sculpture, photographs, and creative writing.
Further information is available from the pre-architecture
advisers: Professor Vesna Pavlović, Department of Art, and
Professor Kevin Murphy, Department of the History of Art.
In addition, the Vanderbilt student club, BLUEprint, seeks to
educate and prepare students interested in this field.
Minor in Environmental Engineering
A minor in environmental engineering is available to all noncivil engineering students. It requires a total of 15 hours of environmental engineering courses, comprising 6 hours of required
courses and 9 hours of electives, chosen from the following list:
Required Courses (6 hours)
CE 3600 – Environmental Engineering
ENVE 4600 – Environmental Chemistry
Elective Courses (9 hours)
CE 3705 – Water Resources Engineering
CE 4100 – Geographic Information Systems
CHBE 4899 – Atmospheric Pollution
ENVE 4305 – Enterprise Risk Management
ENVE 4605 – Environmental Thermodynamics, Kinetics, and Mass Transfer
ENVE 4610 – Biological Processes in Environmental Systems
ENVE 4615 – Environmental Assessments
ENVE 4620 – Environmental Characterization and Analysis
ENVE 4625 – Environmental Separations Processes
ENVE 4700 – Energy and Water Resources
ENVE 4705 – Physical Hydrology
ENVE 4710 – Hydrology
ENVE 4715 – Groundwater Hydrology
ENVE 4720 – Surface Water Quality Modeling
ENVE 4800 – Introduction to Nuclear Environmental Engineering

Minor in Energy and Environmental Systems
The minor in energy and environmental systems is designed to
provide students with a working knowledge of the fundamentals
of energy systems and their impact on the environment. The
future health and well-being of humanity hinge in large part on
smart production and use of energy, water, and related resources,
as these are central determinants of climate change, habitable
space, and human and ecological health. This program examines
the relationships among individual, institutional, and societal
choices for energy production and use, and the impacts and
benefits of these choices on the environment and health through
climate, water quality, and natural resources. It requires a total of
15 semester hours of course work, some of which may be taken as
electives associated with the student’s major program. Five courses
are required: two core courses and three elective courses distributed among three areas (at least one course from each of two
areas): Area I: Energy Systems, Area II: Environmental Engineering, and Area III: Environmental Survey.
Required Courses (6 hours)
ENVE 4615 – Environmental Assessments
ENVE 4700 – Energy and Water Resources
Elective Courses (9 hours)
Area I: Energy Systems
EECE 4267 – Power System Analysis
ME 3890 – Special Topics: Nuclear Power
ME 4260 – Energy Conversion I

309
ME 4264 – Internal Combustion Engines
ME 4265 – Direct Energy Conversion
Area II: Environmental Engineering
CE 3600 – Environmental Engineering
CE 3705 – Water Resources Engineering
CHBE 4899 – Atmospheric Pollution
ENVE 4305 – Enterprise Risk Management
ENVE 4605 – Environmental Thermodynamics, Kinetics, and Mass Transfer
ENVE 4620 – Environmental Characterization and Analysis
ENVE 4710 – Hydrology
ENVE 4800 – Introduction to Nuclear Environmental Engineering
ME 4262 – Environmental Control
Area III: Environmental Survey
ANTH 4154 – Energy, Environment, and Culture
CE 4100 – Geographic Information Systems
CE 4430 –Building Systems and LEED
EES 1080 – Earth and the Atmosphere
EES 2110 – Global Change and Global Issues
PHIL 3611 – Environmental Philosophy
SOC 3315 – Human Ecology and Society

Civil Engineering
Course descriptions begin on page 330.

Environmental Engineering
Course descriptions begin on page 334.

Computer Engineering
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES W. Timothy Holman
PROFESSORS EMERITI Alfred B. Bonds, Arthur J. Brodersen, James
A. Cadzow, Lawrence W. Dowdy, J. Michael Fitzpatrick, Kazuhiko
Kawamura, Stephen R. Schach
PROFESSORS Bharat L. Bhuva, Gautam Biswas, Benoit M. Dawant,
Weng Poo Kang, Gábor Karsai, Xenofon D. Koutsoukos, Akos
Ledeczi, Lloyd W. Massengill, Padma Raghavan, Nilanjan Sarkar,
Douglas C. Schmidt, Ronald D. Schrimpf, Janos Sztipanovits
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Ralph W. Bruce
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Robert E. Bodenheimer, Jr., Douglas H.
Fisher, Aniruddha S. Gokhale, Bennett Landman, William H. Robinson,
D. Mitchell Wilkes
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Abhishek Dubey, Taylor Johnson, Maithilee
Kunda, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, Jules White
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Graham S. Hemingway,
Amy S. Kauppila
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Jack H. Noble, Brian D. Sierawski
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Andrew Sternberg

THE program in computer engineering deals with the organization, design, and application of digital processing systems
as general-purpose computers or as embedded systems, i.e.,
components of information processing, control, and communication systems. The program provides a strong engineering
background centered on digital technology combined with an
understanding of the principles and techniques of computer
science. Computer engineering is design-oriented. The basic
principles of engineering and computer science are applied to
the task at hand, which may be the design of a digital processor,
processor peripheral, or a complete digital processor-based
system. Whatever the undertaking, the comprehensive academic training in this program enables engineers to evaluate

E

310

vanderbilt university

the impact of their decisions, whether working with hardware,
software, or the interface between the two.
The computer engineering program combines fundamental
core requirements with flexibility to allow students to specialize in a variety of emphasis areas within the program. The
curriculum includes requirements in the basic sciences, mathematics, and humanities; a primary core of hardware and software courses; and a set of electives that combine breadth and
depth requirements as described below. Students who major
in computer engineering who wish to apply for graduate study
in electrical engineering or computer science are encouraged
strongly to select their elective courses to demonstrate depth in
that particular area; the structure of the program enables that
option. The course of study leads to a bachelor of engineering.
Undergraduate Honors Program. With faculty approval,
junior and senior students may be accepted into the Honors
Program. To achieve honors status, the student must:
1. achieve and maintain a minimum GPA of 3.5.
2. complete 3 hours of undergraduate research (EECE 3860,
3861) with final written report.
3. complete 6 hours of EECE program elective credit from the
following list:
a. up to 3 additional hours of undergraduate research
(EECE 3860, 3861), or
b. design domain expertise (DE) courses beyond the one
course required by the program, or
c. 5000-level courses.
The diploma designation is Honors in Computer
Engineering.

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The B.E. in computer engineering requires a minimum of 127
hours distributed as follows:
1. Mathematics (18 hours). Required courses: MATH 1300,
1301, 2300, 2400, 2810
2. Basic Science (16 hours). Required courses: CHEM
1601/1601L; PHYS 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L; MSE 1500/ 1500L
(or CHEM 1602/1602L).
3. Engineering Fundamentals (6 hours). Required courses:
ES 1401, 1402, 1403, 2100W.
4. Culminating Design Experience (7 hours). Required
courses: EECE 4950, 4951, 4959.
5. Computer Engineering Core (at least 26 hours). Required
courses: EECE 2112, 2116/2116L, 2218/2218L and either
2213/2213L or 3214; CS 1101, 2201, 2231, and 3251.
6. Computer Engineering Electives (18 hours). Defined by
a structure that includes the three Computer Engineering Areas of Concentration listed below. Students must
complete at least two courses in each of two areas of
concentration. Embedded Systems (Area 1) must include
EECE 4376, Computing Systems and Networks (Area 2)
must include CS 3281 and Intelligent Systems and Robotics
(Area 3) must include EECE 4257. Students must complete
at least one approved design domain expertise (DE) course
as designated below. Other electives from any of the Areas
of Concentration or approved undergraduate research
(CS 3860-3861; EECE 3860-3861) to total 18 hours.

Computer Engineering Areas of Concentration
Embedded Systems
Computing Systems and Networks
Intelligent Systems and Robotics
		
EECE 4257
CS 3265
CS 4260
EECE 4275
CS 3274 (DE)
CS 4269 (DE)
EECE 4356 (DE)
CS 3281
EECE 4257
EECE 4358 (DE)
CS 3282 (DE)
EECE 4353 (DE)
EECE 4376 (DE)
CS 4266 (DE)
EECE 4354 (DE)
EECE 4377 (DE)
CS 4278 (DE)
EECE 4358 (DE)
EECE 4385 (DE)
CS 4279 (DE)
ME 4271
CS 3274 (DE)
CS 4283 (DE)
CS 4284 (DE)
CS 4285
CS 4288 (DE)
EECE 4371 (DE)
(DE) designates a Design Domain Expertise course

School of Engineering / Computer Engineering

7. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours). To be selected to fulfill the
Liberal Arts Core requirements listed in the Degree Programs in Engineering.
8. Technical electives (15 hours).
a. (6-15 hours). At least 6 hours must be taken from this list
of approved engineering technical electives.
BME (except 2201, 3860, 3861)
CHBE
CE
CS (except 1103, 1151)
EECE (hours above basic requirement in sections 5
and 6 above)
ENGM 3010
ENVE
ES 3300
ME
MSE (except 1500, 1500L)
NANO 3000
SC 3250, 3260

311

b. (0-9 hours). Up to 9 hours may be taken from this list of
optional technical electives.
ENGM 2160, 2210, 3000, 3100, 3300, 3650, 4500
MSE 1500, 1500L (if CHEM 1602, 1602L is used for 		
basic science requirement)
Astronomy (except 1010, 1111, 2130)
Biological Sciences (except 1111)
Chemistry (except 1010, 1020, 1601, 1602, 1111)
Earth and Environmental Sciences (except 1080, 1111, 2150)
Mathematics 2410 and above
Neuroscience 2201, 3269, 4961
Physics above 2000
Psychology 2100, 3780
9. Open Elective (3 hours).
Undergraduates in computer engineering may apply the
pass/fail option only to courses taken as open electives subject
to the school requirements for pass/fail.

Specimen Curriculum for Computer Engineering
		
FRESHMAN YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

EECE 2116/2116L†
CS 1101

Digital Logic
Programming and Problem Solving
Other freshman courses (see the engineering
freshman-year specimen curriculum)
		
		
SOPHOMORE YEAR

–
–
14

4
3
8

___
14

___
15

MATH 2300
MATH 2400
PHYS 1602
PHYS 1602L
MSE 1500 †
MSE 1500L †
EECE 2112
EECE 2218/2218L
CS 2201
CS 2231
CS 3251

3
–
3
1
–
–
3
–
3
–
–
3
___
16

–
4
–
–
3
1
–
4
–
3
3
–
___
18

Multivariable Calculus
Differential Equations with Linear Algebra
General Physics II
General Physics Laboratory II
Materials Science I
Materials Science Laboratory
Circuits I
Microcontrollers
Program Design and Data Structures
Computer Organization
Intermediate Software Design
Liberal Arts Core
		
		
JUNIOR YEAR		
MATH 2810
ES 2100W
EECE 4376/4376L
or CS 3281
EECE 2213/2213L
or EECE 3214

Probability and Statistics for Engineering
–
Technical Communications
3
Embedded Systems		
Principles of Operating Systems I
4/3
Circuits II		
Signals and Systems
4/3
CMPE Program Elective ‡
3
Liberal Arts Core
3
Technical Electives
–
		
___
		
15-17

3
–
–
–
6
3
6
___
18

E

312

vanderbilt university

SENIOR YEAR		
EECE 4950
EECE 4951
EECE 4959

Program and Project Management for EECE
Electrical and Computer Engineering Design
Senior Engineering Design Seminar
CMPE Program Electives ‡
Liberal Arts Core
Technical Electives
Open Electives
		
		

3
–
1
3
3
6
–
___
16

–
3
–
3
3
3
3
___
15

† Computer engineering majors are encouraged to take EECE 2116/2116L in the spring of their freshman year in lieu of MSE 1500/1500L. MSE 1500/1500L may be taken in
the sophomore year.
‡ As described in “Computer Engineering Degree Requirements” subsection 6. At least one design domain expertise (DE) course required prior to EECE 4951.

Computer Science
CHAIR Daniel M. Fleetwood
ASSOCIATE CHAIR Douglas C. Schmidt
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Julie L. Johnson
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Akos Ledeczi
PROFESSORS EMERITI Lawrence W. Dowdy, Charlotte F. Fischer, J.
Michael Fitzpatrick, Stephen R. Schach
PROFESSORS Gautam Biswas, Benoit M. Dawant, Gábor Karsai,
Xenofon D. Koutsoukos, Akos Ledeczi, Bradley A. Malin, Padma
Raghavan, Douglas C. Schmidt, Nabil Simaan, Janos Sztipanovits
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Gerald H. Roth
RESEARCH PROFESSOR Robert Laddaga
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Robert E. Bodenheimer, Jr., Douglas H.
Fisher, Aniruddha S. Gokhale, Bennett Landman, Jeremy P. Spinrad
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Julie L. Johnson
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS J. Anthony Capra, Abhishek Dubey, Daniel
Fabbri, Ivelin S. Georgiev, Taylor Johnson, Maithilee Kunda, Yevgeniy
Vorobeychik, Jules White
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Graham S. Hemingway,
Vikash Singh, Robert Tairas
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Shilo Anders, Ana Gainaru,
Ilyoo Lyu, Jack H. Noble, Hongyang Sun
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Daniel Balasubramanian, Zhiao Shi
SENIOR LECTURER Daniel Arena
LECTURERS Dominique Piot, Peter Volgyesi

THE program in computer science blends scientific and
engineering principles, theoretical analysis, and actual computing experience to provide undergraduate students with a
solid foundation in the discipline. Emphasis is on comput- ing
activities of both practical and intellectual interest, and on
theoretical studies of efficient algorithms and the limits
of computation. Computer facilities are available for class
assignments, team projects, and individual studies. Students
are challenged to seek original insights throughout their study.
Working in teams, participating in summer internships, supporting student professional organizations, and developing
interdisciplinary projects are strongly encouraged.
The computer science major provides an excellent background for medical studies, and the flexibility provided by its
many open electives allows students to prepare for medical school
while earning a degree in computer science with a normal load in
four years. Interested students should discuss their plans with their
computer science adviser in the fall of their first year.

In addition to the bachelor of science, the master of science
and doctor of philosophy are also awarded in computer science. Many students choose to double major in mathematics.
Undergraduate Honors Program. The Honors Program
provides recognition for select undergraduates who have
experienced advanced study in computer science. Students who
have an overall GPA of 3.5 or better, a GPA of 3.5 or better in
computer science classes, and six hours of any combination
of undergraduate research (CS 3860 and 3861) and 6000-level
courses will be granted honors in the computer science program.
The diploma designation is Honors in Computer Science.

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The B.S. in computer science requires a minimum of 120 hours,
distributed as follows:
1. Mathematics (20–22 hours). Required components:
(a) Calculus/Linear algebra (14–16 hours). A sequence
selected from the following:
i. MATH 1200, 1201, 1301, 2300, and one of 2410 or 2600,
ii. MATH 1300, 1301, 2300, and one of 2410 or 2600, or
iii. MATH 1300, 1301, 2500, 2501
(b) Statistics/Probability (3 hours): MATH 2810, 2820, or 3640.
(c) Elective course (3 hours).
To be selected from MATH 2420 or courses numbered
2610 or higher.
2. Science (12 hours). To be selected from the following list
and include at least one laboratory course: BSCI 1100, 1100L,
1510, 1510L, 1511, 1511L, 2218, 2219; CHEM 1601, 1601L, 1602,
1602L; Earth and Environmental Sciences 1510, 1510L; MSE
1500, 1500L; PHYS 1601, 1601L, 1602, 1602L. Recommended:
CHEM 1601, 1601L; PHYS 1601, 1602.
3. Introduction to Engineering (3 hours): ES 1401, 1402,1403.
4. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours). To be selected to fulfill the
Liberal Arts Core requirements listed in the Degree Programs in Engineering.
5. Computer Science Core (28 hours).
Software/Problem Solving: CS 1101, 2201, 3251, 3270.
Hardware/Systems: EECE 2116, 2116L; CS 2231, 3281.
Foundations: CS 2212, 3250.

School of Engineering / Computer Science

6. Computer Science Depth (12 hours). To be selected from
computer science courses numbered 3000 or higher; EECE
4353, 4354, 4376 and no more than two from MATH 3320,
3620, 4600, 4620. A maximum of 6 hours may come from
CS 3860, 3861. At least one course must be selected from
CS 3259, 3892, 4269, 4279, 4287.
7. Computer Science Project Seminar (1 hour) CS 4959.
8. Technical Electives (6 hours). To be selected from courses
numbered 2000 or higher within the School of Engineering (except ENGM 2440, ENGM 4800, ES 2700, and CS
courses numbered below 3000); or courses numbered 2000
or higher in the College of Arts and Science listed in the
mathematics and natural science (MNS) AXLE distribution
requirements. Students are encouraged to note the twocourse sequence EECE 4950-4951.

313

9. Open Electives (18–20 hours).
10. Computers and Ethics (3 hours) CS 1151. May be used to
satisfy three hours from the Liberal Arts Core (#4) or Open
Electives (#9).
11. Writing Component. At least one “W”-designated course or
1111 course in the English Language must be included from
the Liberal Arts Core (#4) or Open Electives (#9).
Undergraduates in computer science may apply the pass/
fail option only to courses taken as open electives, technical
electives, or part of the liberal arts core, subject to the school
requirements for pass/fail.

Specimen Curriculum for Computer Science
		
FRESHMAN YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

CHEM 1601
CHEM 1601L
PHYS 1601
PHYS 1601L
MATH 1300
MATH 1301
ES 1401-1403
CS 1101

3
1
–
–
4
–
3
–
3
–
___
14

–
–
3
1
–
4
–
3
–
3
___
14

General Physics II
General Physics Laboratory II
Multivariable Calculus
Digital Logic
Program Design and Data Structures
Discrete Structures
Computer Organization
Intermediate Software Design
Liberal Arts Core
Open Elective
		
		

3
1
–
4
3
–
–
–
–
3
___
14

–
–
3
–
–
3
3
3
3
–
___
15

JUNIOR YEAR		
MATH 2410
Methods of Linear Algebra
MATH 2820
Introduction to Probability and Mathematical Statistics
Algorithms
CS 3250
CS 3270
Programming Languages
CS 3281
Principles of Operating Systems I
CS Depth
Open Electives (ES 2100W recommended)
Liberal Arts Core
		
		

–
3
–
3
3
–
5
3
___
17

3
–
3
–
–
3
3
3
___
15

General Chemistry
General Chemistry Laboratory
General Physics I
General Physics Laboratory I
Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus I
Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus II
Introduction to Engineering
Programming and Problem Solving
Open Electives
Liberal Arts Core
		
		
SOPHOMORE YEAR
PHYS 1602
PHYS 1602L
MATH 2300
EECE 2116/2116L
CS 2201
CS 2212
CS 2231
CS 3251

E

314

vanderbilt university

		
SENIOR YEAR		
CS 4959
Computer Science Project Seminar
Computer Science Project
Mathematics Elective
CS Depth/Technical Elective
Liberal Arts Core
Open Electives
		
		

Second Major in Computer Science for
Non-Engineering Students
The second major in computer science for students enrolled
outside the School of Engineering requires 40 hours distributed according to items 5 and 6 of the curriculum requirements listed above.
Courses taken toward the second major may not be taken
pass/fail.
Computer Science Minor
The minor in computer science requires 15 hours of computer
science courses as follows:
1. Programming: CS 1101
3
2. Discrete Structures: CS 2212
3
3. Intermediate Computer Concepts: CS 2201
3
4. One of CS 2231, CS 3250, or CS 3251
3
5. One additional CS course numbered 3000 or above
3
		
Total hours: 15
Course descriptions begin on page 336.

Electrical Engineering
CHAIR Daniel M. Fleetwood
ASSOCIATE CHAIR Douglas C. Schmidt
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES W. Timothy Holman
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Robert A. Reed
PROFESSORS EMERITI Alfred B. Bonds, Arthur J. Brodersen, James A.
Cadzow, George E. Cook, Jimmy L. Davidson, J. Michael Fitzpatrick,
Dennis G. Hall, Robert W. House, L. Ensign Johnson, Kazuhiko
Kawamura, Richard G. Shiavi, Robert A. Weller, Francis M. Wells,
Edward J. White
PROFESSORS Bharat L. Bhuva, Benoit M. Dawant, Mark Does, Philippe
M. Fauchet, Daniel M. Fleetwood, Kenneth F. Galloway, Michael
Goldfarb, Weng Poo Kang, Gábor Karsai, Xenofon D. Koutsoukos,
Akos Ledeczi, Lloyd W. Massengill, Sokrates T. Pantelides, Robert A.
Reed, Ronald D. Schrimpf, Janos Sztipanovits, Sharon M. Weiss
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Ralph W. Bruce
RESEARCH PROFESSORS Michael L. Alles, Sandeep Neema
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Robert E. Bodenheimer, Kirill Bolotin, Joshua
D. Caldwell, Bennett Landman, Richard Alan Peters II, William H.
Robinson, Jason G. Valentine, Greg Walker, Robert J. Webster III, D.
Mitchell Wilkes, James E. Wittig, Yaqiong Xu
RESEARCH ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Theodore A. Bapty, Zhaohua Ding,
W. Timothy Holman, Miklos Maroti, Arthur F. Witulski, Enxia Zhang
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS William A. Grissom, Taylor Johnson, Justus
Ndukaife
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Pierre-François D'Haese,
Shaohua Hsu, Jeffrey S. Kauppila, Jack H. Noble, Supil Raina, Brian
D. Sierawski
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSOR Andrew L. Sternberg

Semester
FALL
1
–
3
6
3
3
___
16

hours
SPRING
–
3
–
6
3
3
___
15

THE electrical engineer has been primarily responsible for the
information technology revolution that society is experiencing.
The development of large-scale integrated circuits has led to
the development of computers and networks of ever-increasing
capabilities. Computers greatly influence the methods used by
engineers for designing and problem solving.
The curricula of the electrical engineering and computer
engineering majors are multifaceted. They provide a broad
foundation in mathematics, physics, and computer science and
a traditional background in circuit analysis and electronics.
Several exciting areas of concentration are available, including microelectronics, computer systems, robotics and control
systems, and signal processing. Double majors may be arranged
with some programs, including biomedical engineering and
mathematics. Students receive an education that prepares them
for diverse careers in industry and government and for postgraduate education.
Undergraduate Honors Program. With faculty approval,
junior and senior students may be accepted into the Honors
Program. To achieve honors status, the student must:
1. achieve and maintain a minimum GPA of 3.5.
2. complete 3 hours of undergraduate research (EECE 3860,
3861) with final written report.
3. complete 6 hours of EECE program elective credit from the
following list:
a. up to 3 additional hours of undergraduate research
(EECE 3860, 3861), or
b. design domain expertise (DE) courses beyond the one
course required by the program, or
c. 5000-level courses.
The diploma designation is Honors in Electrical
Engineering.
Facilities. Electrical and computer engineering supports
undergraduate laboratories emphasizing the principal areas of
the disciplines: analog and digital electronics, microcomputers,
microprocessors, microelectronics, and instrumentation. In
addition, several specialized facilities are available for graduate
research: the advanced carbon nanotechnology and diamond
labs, the Institute for Software Integrated Systems, the Institute
for Space and Defense Electronics, the Medical Image Processing Laboratory, the Center for Intelligent Systems and Robotics
Laboratories, the Embedded Computer Systems Laboratory, and
biomedical, biosensing, and photonics laboratories.
The work in electrical and computer engineering is supported by a variety of computers and networks, including
the high-performance computing facilities of the Advanced
Computing Center for Research and Education. Vanderbilt is
one of the founding partners in the Internet II initiative.

School of Engineering / Electrical Engineering

315

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The B.E. in electrical engineering requires a minimum of 128
hours, distributed as follows:
1. Mathematics (18 hours). Required courses: MATH 1300,
1301, 2300, 2400, 2810.
2. Basic Science (16 hours). Required courses: CHEM 1601/1601L;
PHYS 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L; MSE 1500/1500L (or CHEM
1602/1602L for some double majors).
3. Engineering Fundamentals (6 hours). Required courses:
ES 1401, 1402, 1403, ES 2100W.

4. Culminating Design Experience (7 hours). Required
courses: EECE 4950, 4951, 4959.
5. Electrical Engineering Core (24 hours). Required courses:
CS 1101 or 1103; EECE 2112, 2116/2116L, 2213/2213L, 3214, 3233,
3235/3235L.
6. Electrical Engineering Electives (18 hours). Defined by a
structure that includes the five Electrical Engineering Areas
of Concentration listed below. Students must complete at
least two courses in each of two concentration areas. Students must complete at least one approved design domain
expertise (DE) course as designated below. Other EECE
electives to total 18 hours.

Electrical Engineering Areas of Concentration
Computer Engr.		

Microelectronics		

Signal/Image Processing		

Robotics 		

Networking and Comm.

EECE 2218		
EECE 4275		
EECE 4275		
EECE 4283		
EECE 4356 (DE)		
EECE 4284		
EECE 4376 (DE)		
EECE 4288		
EECE 4377 (DE)		
EECE 4380 (DE)		
EECE 4385 (DE)		
EECE 4385 (DE)		
CS 3274 (DE)		
BME 3300		
ME 4271				

EECE 4252		
EECE 4286		
EECE 4353 (DE)		
EECE 4354 (DE)		
EECE 4356 (DE)
CS 3258
BME 3300
BME 3600

EECE 4257
EECE 4354 (DE)
EECE 4358 (DE)
ME 4271

EECE 4252
EECE 4371 (DE)

(DE) designates a Design Domain Expertise course

7. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours). To be selected to fulfill the
Liberal Arts Core requirements listed in the Degree Programs in Engineering.
8. Technical electives (18 hours).
a. (9–18 hours). At least 9 hours must be taken from this list
of approved engineering technical electives.
BME (except 2201, 3860, 3861)
CHBE
CE
CS (except 1101, 1103, 1151)
EECE (above basic requirement in sections 5 and 6 above)
ENGM 3010
ENVE
ES 3300
ME
MSE (except 1500, 1500L)
NANO 3000
SC 3250, 3260
b. (0–9 hours). Up to 9 hours may be taken from this list of
optional technical electives.
ENGM 2160, 2210, 3000, 3100, 3300, 3650, 4500
MSE 1500, 1500L (if CHEM 1602, 1602L is used for basic
science requirement)

Astronomy (except 1010, 1111, 2130)
Biological Sciences (except 1111)
Chemistry (except 1010, 1020, 1601, 1602, 1111)
Earth and Environmental Sciences (except 1080, 1111, 2150)
Mathematics 2410 and above
Neuroscience 2201, 3269, 4961
Physics above 2000
Psychology 2100, 3780
9. Open Elective (3 hours).
Double majors have special curricula that require more
than 128 hours and a different distribution of electives. See the
EECS webpage or the EECE double major adviser for these
curricula.
A double major in electrical engineering and biomedical
engineering is offered as a unitary BME-EE curriculum, which
is described in the Biomedical Engineering section of the catalog under its curriculum requirements. It requires a minimum
of 129 semester hours.
Undergraduates in electrical engineering, including double
majors in electrical engineering, may apply the pass/fail option
only to courses taken as open electives subject to the school
requirements for pass/fail.

E

316

vanderbilt university

Specimen Curriculum for Electrical Engineering
		
FRESHMAN YEAR †		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

EECE 2116/2116L†

–

4

14
___
14

12
___
16

MATH 2300
MATH 2400
PHYS 1602
PHYS 1602L
CS 1101 or 1103 †
EECE 2112
EECE 2213/2213L

Multivariable Calculus
Differential Equations with Linear Algebra
General Physics II
General Physics Laboratory II
Programming and Problem Solving
Circuits I
Circuits II
Liberal Arts Core
Technical Electives
		
		
JUNIOR YEAR

3
–
3
1
3
3
–
3
–
___
16

–
4
–
–
–
–
4
3
6
___
17

MATH 2810
ES 2100W
EECE 3214
EECE 3233
EECE 3235/3235L

Probability and Statistics for Engineering
Technical Communications
Signals and Systems
Electromagnetics
Electronics I
EE Program Electives ‡
Liberal Arts Core
Technical Elective
		
		
SENIOR YEAR

–
–
3
3
4
–
3
3
___
16

3
3
–
–
–
9
3
–
___
18

EECE 4950
EECE 4951
EECE 4959

3
–
1
6
–
6
–
___
16

–
3
–
3
3
3
3
___
15

Digital Logic
Other freshman courses (see the engineering
freshman-year specimen curriculum)
		
		
SOPHOMORE YEAR		

Program and Project Management for EECE
Electrical and Computer Engineering Design
Senior Engineering Design Seminar
EE Program Electives ‡
Liberal Arts Core
Technical Electives
Open elective
		
		

† Electrical engineering majors are encouraged to take EECE 2116 and EECE 2116L in the spring of their freshman year in lieu of CS 1101 or 1103, which may be taken in
the sophomore year. CS 1101 is recommended over CS 1103 for electrical engineering majors; those who plan double majors should see their advisers.
‡ As described in Electrical Engineering Degree Requirements subsection 6. At least one design domain expertise (DE) course required prior to EECE 4951.

Course descriptions begin on page 340.

School of Engineering / General Engineering

General Engineering
DIRECTOR Christopher J. Rowe
PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE David A. Owens, Kenneth R. Pence,
Christopher J. Rowe, Julie E. Sharp
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE David A. Berezov,
Benjamin T. Jordan, Yiorgos Kostoulas
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Graham S. Hemingway,
Andrew Van Schaack
ADJUNCT INSTRUCTORS Julie S. Birdsong, Courtney L. Johnson

THE Division of General Engineering administers the engineering science major, the engineering management minor,
and the first-year introduction to engineering course. The division oversees non-traditional engineering study and advises
students on course selection to meet specific career goals that
traditional engineering majors may not provide.
Engineering Science Major (Bachelor of Science)
The engineering science major is flexible and interdisciplinary—
offering students the opportunity to select a program of study
to meet special interests or objectives. Many students choose a
program of study in engineering management, communication
of science and technology, various engineering concentrations,
environmental science or materials science; however, students
may develop unique plans of study to specialize in areas for
which facilities and faculty competence exist but which are not
covered within a single existing degree program at Vanderbilt.
Engineering science graduates may establish careers in engineering or science, interface with engineers (e.g., in marketing
and sales), or use their analytical and problem-solving skills to
build future professional careers. Defined areas of concentration
exist in engineering management, communication of science
and technology, secondary education, and materials science
and engineering. Individual programs have been developed
for students interested in careers in engineering mathematics, environmental engineering, transportation engineering,
teaching, technical communications, and other areas requiring
nontraditional combinations of engineering courses. Because of
the flexible nature of the engineering science programs of study,
accreditation has not been sought for these programs of study,
and engineering science majors will not qualify for engineering
licensure in most states.
Engineering Management. Engineering management is an
interdisciplinary program of study designed to give students
the tools to manage technology development and innovation, to enhance manufacturing quality and productivity in
a competitive international environment, and to implement
these objectives successfully in an organization. Engineering
management links engineering, science, and the management
disciplines. In addition to the core science and math courses
required of all engineering students, topics of study include
entrepreneurship, human resources management, finance in
technology-based organizations, technology strategy, communications, and operations.
Communication of Science and Technology. Many careers
that are attractive to graduates of the engineering science program require the communication of engineering and science
to people who are not technically trained. The Communication
of Science and Technology interdisciplinary program prepares
engineering students for careers in areas such as technical
consulting, high-technology marketing and sales, environmental law, and journalism. The program combines traditional

317

engineering and science courses with communications and
humanities courses in a flexible curriculum. Engineering science majors may select from a set of program electives identified by the faculty committee of the School of Engineering and
the College of Arts and Science that supervises the program.
Minors. Students may also pursue a minor consisting of at
least five courses of at least three credit hours within a recognized area of knowledge. Minors are offered in engineering
management, materials science and engineering, computer science, scientific computing, environmental engineering, energy
and environmental systems, nanoscience and nanotechnology,
and most disciplines within the College of Arts and Science.
Students must declare their intention to pursue minors by
completing forms available in the Office of Academic Services of
the School of Engineering.

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Students must complete a minimum of 121 hours. In consultation with the academic adviser, each student must identify a
program concentration containing a minimum of 24 hours, not
counting certain introductory-level courses, which directly contributes to meeting stated career goals. Program concentrations
are approved by the academic adviser and the program director,
and become part of the student’s degree audit. The preparation
provided by this 24-hour package, together with a solid foundation in basic engineering courses, provides the engineering
science student with a strong and useful career base.
The B.S. in engineering science requires a minimum of 121
hours distributed as follows:
1. Basic Science (16 hours). CHEM 1601/1601L plus 12
hours from the group BSCI 1510/1510L, 1511/1511L; CHEM
1602/1602L; PHYS 1601/1601L, 1602/1602L; or MSE
1500/1500L with two courses in a single discipline.
2. Mathematics (14 hours). Required courses (11 hours): MATH
1300, 1301, 2300. Electives (3 hours): to be selected from
mathematics courses numbered 2400 and above.
3. Engineering (43 hours).
a) Engineering Fundamentals (12 hours): CS 1101 or 1103; ES
1401, 1402, 1403, 2100W; ENGM 3700.
b) Engineering Core (12 hours): To be selected from courses
in any of the following disciplines: BME, CHBE, CE, CS,
EECE, ENVE, MSE, ME, NANO, SC.
c) Engineering Electives (15 hours): To be selected from any
Engineering School courses (including ENGM).
d) Senior Capstone (4 hours): ES 4951, ES 4959.
4. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours). To be selected to fulfill the Liberal Arts Core requirements listed under Degree Programs in
Engineering.
5. Open Electives (6 hours).
6. Program Concentration (24 hours). In consultation with the
academic adviser, each student must identify a meaningful
sequence of courses, not counting certain introductory-level
courses, that directly contributes to meeting stated career
goals. Program concentrations are approved by the academic
adviser and the program director in advance and become
part of the student’s degree audit.

E

318

No more than 24 credit hours of business-related course work
(BUS, ENGM, FNEC, MGRL) may be applied to the ES degree
program. Only one business-related minor (BUS, ENGM, FNEC,
MGRL, HOD) may count to a student’s academic program.
Undergraduates in engineering science may apply the
pass/ fail option only to courses taken as liberal arts core or
open electives, subject to the school requirements for pass/fail.
UNIV courses are eligible for open elective credit only.
Course descriptions begin on page 344.

Engineering Management Minor
Engineering management is an interdisciplinary program of
study designed to expose engineering students to the concepts
and theories of the management of the engineering function,
the critical elements of technology development and innovation, and the implementation of such ideas in manufacturing,
engineering, and technology environments. Approximately
two-thirds of all engineers spend a substantial portion of their
professional careers as managers. In the complex, competitive
world of technology-driven industry, skilled engineers who
understand the essential principles of management and business
have a competitive advantage.
The program in engineering management prepares students
to work effectively in developing, implementing, and modifying
technologies and systems. The ability to manage and administer
large technical engineering and research projects and budgets
will continue to challenge engineering management skills.
Undergraduates interested in engineering management have
two options. They may earn the B.E. in another engineering discipline with a minor in engineering management, or they may
earn the B.S. in computer science or engineering science with
engineering management as their area of concentration.
The engineering management minor is designed to provide
a working knowledge of the fundamentals of management and
innovation.
The minor program consists of 15 hours of course work,
some of which may be taken as electives associated with the
student’s major program. Five courses are required: four core
courses and the remaining course chosen from a list of electives.

Program Requirements
The student must take the following four courses:
ENGM 2210 Technology Strategy
ENGM 2440 Applied Behavioral Science
ENGM 3000 Enterprise Systems Design OR
ENGM 3010 Systems Engineering
ENGM 3700 Program and Project Management
The student must select one of the following courses:
ENGM 2160 Engineering Economy
ENGM 3100 Accounting and Finance for Engineers
ENGM 3200 Technology Marketing
ENGM 3300 Technology Assessment and Forecasting
ENGM 3350 Organizational Behavior
ENGM 3600 Technology-Based Entrepreneurship
ENGM 3650 Operations and Supply Chain Management
ENGM 4500 Product Development
ENGM 4951 Engineering Management Capstone Project
Reliability and Risk Case Studies
CE 4300
ENVE 4305 Enterprise Risk Management
Course descriptions begin on page 343.

vanderbilt university

Materials Science and
Engineering
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Bridget R. Rogers
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Eva Harth
PROFESSORS EMERITI Jimmy L. Davidson, Leonard C. Feldman, George
T. Hahn, Donald L. Kinser, Taylor G. Wang, Robert A. Weller
PROFESSORS Weng Poo Kang, Sandra J. Rosenthal, Sharon M. Weiss
ADJOINT PROFESSOR James Bentley
ADJUNCT PROFESSOR Ashok Choudhury
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR James E. Wittig
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Rizia Bardhan, Leon M. Bellan
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Amrutur V. Anilkumar

MATERIALS are the limiting factor for most technological
advances. The impact of materials on history is obvious, since
technological progress in a given era is demarcated by the available materials. The Stone Age was followed by the Bronze Age
and the Iron Age. The present period could be identified as the
Silicon Age, which is only in its first century.
New materials allow for new technology and this is especially
the case for the emerging field of nanoscience. As the size scale
approaches nanometer dimensions, materials exhibit new and
exciting physical properties. High performance metals, ceramics, polymers, semiconductors and composites are in demand
throughout the engineering world and nanotechnology is
proving to be the answer for many engineering problems. The
U.S. National Science Foundation identified nanoscience and
nanotechnology as a critical area for our future and created a
national initiative to advance the processing and performance
of nanomaterials. To accomplish these tasks, there is a need for
specialists in materials science and engineering with an interdisciplinary background that combines engineering disciplines
with the physical sciences.
The materials science and engineering program is integrated
into the extensive ongoing nanotechnology research. The
Vanderbilt Institute for Nanoscience and Engineering (VINSE)
is at the center of this effort. Research areas include; nanofluidics,
synthesis of semiconductor quantum dots, magnetic nanocrystals,
nanoscale soft materials, optical properties of nanostructures,
carbon nanotubes, nanodiamond devices, biological applications
of nanocrystals, and molecular modeling and simulation of these
nanoscale structures. This interdisciplinary research involves
faculty from all of the engineering disciplines as well as faculty
from chemistry, physics, and the medical school.
Two undergraduate options involving materials science
and engineering are available. Students may pursue the B.S. in
engineering science with materials science and engineering as
their area of concentration or they may earn the B.E. in another
engineering discipline with a minor in materials science and
engineering.
Materials Science and Engineering Concentration
The B.S. in engineering science with a concentration in
materials science and engineering requires satisfaction of the
curriculum requirements of engineering science. The student
must take 27 hours of materials science and engineering program electives that include MSE 1500 and MSE 2500 with the
additional materials science related courses selected to provide
a meaningful sequence that must be planned in advance and
approved by the faculty adviser.

School of Engineering / Mechanical Engineering

Materials Science and Engineering Minor
The minor in materials science and engineering is designated
to provide the student with an understanding of engineering
materials. The goal is to complement and add to the student’s
major in one of the other engineering disciplines for an interdisciplinary approach to problem solving. The minor program in
materials science and engineering requires 16 hours of program
courses, of which 7 hours are devoted to MSE 1500/1500L and
MSE 2500. No more than 10 hours below the 2500 level may be
applied to the minor.

Program Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

MSE 1500, 1500L Materials Science I and Laboratory
MSE 2500
Materials Science II
The remaining 9 hours can be chosen from the following
list of courses.
MSE 3860
Undergraduate Research
MSE 3889-3890 Special Topics
BME 2100
Introductory Biomechanics
BME 2200
Biomedical Materials: Structure, Property,		
		
and Applications
BME 4200
Principles and Applications BioMicroElec-		
		
troMechanical Systems (BioMEMS)
BME 4500
Nanobiotechnology
CHBE 4840 Applications of Nanostructures
CHBE 4850
Semiconductor Materials Processing
CHBE 4860
Molecular Aspects of Chemical Engineering
CHBE 4870
Polymer Science and Engineering
CHBE 4880
Corrosion Science and Engineering
CE 2205
Mechanics of Materials
CE 3205
Structural Design
CE 4200
Advanced Structural Steel Design
CE 4210
Advanced Reinforced Concrete Design
CE 4211
Mechanics of Composite Materials
EECE 4283
Principles and Models of Semiconductor		
		
Devices
EECE 4284
Integrated Circuit Technology and 		
		
Fabrication
ME 3202
Machine Analysis and Design
ME 4251
Modern Manufacturing Processes
ME 4275
Introduction to Finite Element Analysis
CHEM 3010 Inorganic Chemistry
CHEM 3300 Physical Chemistry: Quantum Mechanics, 		
		
Spectroscopy, and Kinetics
CHEM 3630 Macromolecular Chemistry: Polymers, 		
		
Dendrimers, and Surface Modification
PHYS 2250W Introduction to Quantum Physics and 		
		
Applications I
PHYS 2290
Electricity, Magnetism, and Electrodynamics
PHYS 3640
Physics of Condensed Matter
Course descriptions begin on page 345.

319

Mechanical Engineering
CHAIR Robert W. Pitz
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Kenneth D. Frampton
DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE STUDIES Deyu Li
PROFESSORS EMERITI Thomas A. Cruse, George T. Hahn, Donald L.
Kinser, Robert L. Lott Jr., Arthur M. Mellor, Carol A. Rubin, Taylor G.
Wang, James J. Wert, John W. Williamson
PROFESSORS Douglas E. Adams, Michael Goldfarb, S. Duke Herrell,
Deyu Li, Sankaran Mahadevan, Robert W. Pitz, Nilanjan Sarkar, Nabil
Simaan Alvin M. Strauss
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Amrutur V. Anilkumar
ADJUNCT PROFESSOR Ahad Nasab
ADJOINT PROFESSORS Pietro Valdastri, Peiyong Wang
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Eric J. Barth, Joshua D. Caldwell, Haoxiang
Luo, Keith L. Obstein, Caglar Oskay, Bernard Rousseau, Jason G.
Valentine, Greg Walker, Robert J. Webster III
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Robert J. Barnett,
Kenneth D. Frampton, Thomas J. Withrow
ADJOINT ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Joseph A. Wehrmeyer
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Leon M. Bellan, Kelsey B. Hatzell, Cary Pint,
Karl E. Zelik
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Shannon L. Faley, Kevin C.
Galloway, Jason Mitchell, Scott J. Webster
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSOR William A. Emfinger
ADJOINT ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Isuru S. Godage, Carl A. Hall, Ray
A. Lathrop, Tracie J. Prater

THE vitality of our nation depends upon innovation in the
design of new machines, devices to satisfy society’s needs,
engines to produce power efficiently, equipment to condition
the environment of our buildings, and the systems to use and
control these engineered products. Mechanical engineers are
involved in solving problems by originating design concepts,
developing products and processes of manufacture, and
designing hardware and the systems needed to satisfy society’s
demands. Mechanical engineers work in virtually all industries.
The study of mechanical engineering requires a basic
understanding of mathematics, chemistry, physics, and the
engineering sciences. Mechanical engineering education
emphasizes solid mechanics; dynamics of machines; aerodynamics; propulsion devices; material behavior; power producing and environmental conditioning processes; control of
dynamics of machines; energy conversion; and the synthesis,
development, evaluation, and optimization of designs of
devices and systems.
Degree Programs. The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers the B.E., M.Eng., M.S., and Ph.D. in mechanical
engineering.
The curriculum in mechanical engineering leading to a
bachelor of engineering provides a broad-based engineering
education with opportunities for the student to elect courses
in areas of study related to any industry and, with careful
planning of the elective courses, to achieve some specialization.
The mechanical engineering program prepares an individual
to become a practicing engineer who can participate fully
in the engineering activities of design, building, operation,
production, maintenance, safety, marketing, sales, research, and
administration.
Undergraduate Honors Program. See the Special Programs
chapter for general requirements of the professional Honors
Program in mechanical engineering. Honors candidates
choose their technical elective courses with the advice and
consent of an honors adviser. Each candidate is expected to

E

320

take 3 hours of ME 3860 in a single semester and at least 6
hours of graduate courses numbered 5000 or higher, including one course numbered 8000 or higher. A formal written
honors thesis on the candidate’s research must be approved
by the honors adviser and the department chair. Honors
candidates shall meet all Engineering School requirements in
the nontechnical areas. The diploma designation is Honors in
Mechanical Engineering.
Facilities. Undergraduate instructional laboratories are
equipped for studies in heat and power, refrigeration and airconditioning, fluid flow, heat transfer, design, controls, robotics,
instrumentation, and biomechanics. Specialized facilities for
robotic surgery, rehabilitation robotics, energy storage, medical
microfluidics, thermal transport, combustion characterization, and photonics are used for both faculty-led research and
instruction. The department also maintains various maker
spaces including machine shops and design studios for fabrication of experimental equipment and for instruction.

Curriculum Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The B.E. in mechanical engineering requires a minimum of 126
hours, distributed as follows:
1. Mathematics (17 hours). Required courses: MATH 1300,
1301, 2300, 2420. Required elective: one from courses numbered 2410 and above, except 3000.
2. Basic Science (16 hours). Required courses: CHEM
1601/1601L, MSE 1500/1500L (or CHEM 1602/1602L), PHYS
1601/1601L, 1602/1602L.
3. Engineering Science (25 hours). Required courses: ES 1401,
1402, 1403; CE 2200, 2205; CS 1101 or CS 1103; EECE 2112;
ME 2190, 2220, 3224; MSE 2205.

vanderbilt university

4. Liberal Arts Core (18 hours). To be selected to fulfill the
Liberal Arts Core requirements listed in the Degree Programs in Engineering.
5. Open electives (6 hours).
6. ME core (26 hours). ME 2160, 2171, 3202, 3204, 3234, 3248,
4213, 4950, 4951, and 4959
7. Technical electives (9 hours). To be selected from the following approved courses. Courses selected from the College
of Arts and Science must be designated a Mathematics and
Natural Sciences (MNS) course in the AXLE curriculum.
a) Engineering courses except ENGM 2440, 3350, 4800, ES
2700, 2900, and CS 1151
b) Mathematics courses numbered 2420 or higher except
MATH 3000
c) Chemistry courses numbered 2000 or higher
d) Physics courses numbered 2000 or higher
e) Astronomy courses
f) Biological Science courses
g) Earth and Environmental Science courses
h) Neuroscience courses
At least 3 hours must be numbered 2000 or above.
8. Professional (ME) depth (a minimum of 9 hours). Each student must choose at least 9 hours of ME elective courses.
No more than 6 hours of 3850 and 3860 combined can be
credited toward ME depth electives.
No one-credit-hour ME course except 3841 can be used
as a mechanical engineering elective. A maximum of three
one-credit-hour ME courses may be used as technical electives.
Additional ME one-credit-hour courses can be open electives.
At least one “W”-designated course in the English language
must be included on a graded basis.
Undergraduates in mechanical engineering may apply the
pass/fail option only to non-departmental courses taken as
open electives, technical electives, or part of the liberal arts
core, subject to the school requirements for pass/fail.

Specimen Curriculum for Mechanical Engineering
		
		
SOPHOMORE YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

ME 2160
MATH 2300
MATH 2420
PHYS 1602
PHYS 1602L
CE 2200
ME 2171
ME 2190
ME 2220
EECE 2112

3
3
–
3
1
3
–
–
–
–
3
___
16

Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Design
Multivariable Calculus
Methods of Ordinary Differential Equations
General Physics II
General Physics Laboratory II
Statics
Instrumentation Laboratory
Dynamics
Thermodynamics
Circuits I
Liberal Arts Core
		
		

–
–
3
–
–
–
2
3
3
3
3
___
17

School of Engineering / Mechanical Engineering

		
JUNIOR YEAR		

321

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

ME 3202
ME 3204
ME 3224
ME 3234
ME 3248
CE 2205
MSE 2205

Machine Analysis and Design
3
Mechatronics
–
Fluid Mechanics
3
System Dynamics
4
Heat Transfer
–
Mechanics of Materials
3
Strength and Structure of Engineering Materials
1
Mechanical Engineering Elective
–
Open Elective
–
Liberal Arts Core
3
Mathematics Elective
–
		
___
		
17
SENIOR YEAR			

–
3
–
–
3
–
–
3
3
–
3
___
15

ME 4213
ME 4950
ME 4951
ME 4959

–
–
3
–
3
3
3
3
___
15

Energetics Laboratory
Design Synthesis
Engineering Design Projects
Senior Engineering Design Seminar
Mechanical Engineering Elective
Liberal Arts Core
Technical Elective
Open Elective
		
		
Course descriptions begin on page 346.

2
2
–
1
3
3
6
–
___
17

E

322

vanderbilt university

Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology
DIRECTORS Paul E. Laibinis, Sandra J. Rosenthal
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS David E. Cliffel (Chemistry), Peter T. Cummings (Chemical
and Biomolecular Engineering), Philippe M. Fauchet (Electrical
Engineering), Daniel M. Fleetwood (Electrical Engineering), Kenneth
F. Galloway (Electrical Engineering), Todd D. Giorgio (Biomedical
Engineering), Scott A. Guelcher (Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering), Richard F. Haglund, Jr. (Physics), Timothy P. Hanusa
(Chemistry), Frederick R. Haselton (Biomedical Engineering), G. Kane
Jennings (Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering), Weng P. Kang
(Electrical Engineering), Paul E. Laibinis (Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering), Deyu Li (Mechanical Engineering), Charles M. Lukehart
(Chemistry), Clare M. McCabe (Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering), Sokrates T. Pantelides (Physics), Peter N. Pintauro
(Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering), Sandra J. Rosenthal
(Chemistry), Ronald D. Schrimpf (Electrical Engineering), Norman
H. Tolk (Physics), Sharon M. Weiss (Electrical Engineering), John P.
Wikswo, Jr. (Physics), David W. Wright (Chemistry)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Craig L. Duvall (Biomedical Engineering), Eva
M. Harth (Chemistry), Bridget R. Rogers (Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering), Florence Sanchez (Civil Engineering), Jason G. Valentine
(Mechanical Engineering), Kalman Varga (Physics), Greg Walker
(Mechanical Engineering), James E. Wittig (Materials Science and
Engineering), Yaqiong Xu (Physics)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Rizia Bardhan (Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering), Leon Bellan (Mechanical Engineering), Janet E.
MacDonald (Chemistry), Cary L. Pint (Mechanical Engineering), John T.
Wilson (Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering)
RESEARCH ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR Anthony B. Hmelo (Physics)
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Bo Choi (Electrical Engineering),
Dmitry Koktysh (Chemistry), James R. McBride (Chemistry)

FACULTY in the School of Engineering and the College of
Arts and Science offer an interdisciplinary minor in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The minor is administered by the
School of Engineering.
Nanoscience and nanotechnology are based on the ability
to synthesize, organize, characterize, and manipulate matter
systematically at dimensions of ~1 to 100 nm, creating uniquely
functional materials that differ in properties from those prepared
by traditional approaches. At these length scales, materials can
take on new properties that can be exploited in a wide range of
applications such as for solar energy conversion, ultra-sensitive
sensing, and new types of vaccines. These activities require
the integration of expertise from various areas of science and
engineering, often relying on methods of synthesis, fabrication,
and characterization that are beyond those encountered in an
individual course of study.
Students who minor in nanoscience and nanotechnology
learn the principles and methods used in this rapidly growing
field. Its core originates in the physical sciences by providing key
approaches for describing the behavior of matter on the nanoscale.
Synthetic approaches are used to manipulate matter systematically, for creating uniquely functional nanomaterials that can be
inorganic, organic, biological, or a hybrid of these. With a third
component of characterization, a process for designing systems
to have particular properties as a result of their composition and
nanoscale arrangement emerges. Students are introduced to these
areas through foundational and elective courses for the minor that

are specified below, the latter of which can be selected to fulfill the
degree requirements for their major.
The minor in nanoscience and nanotechnology is supported
by the Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering (VINSE) that brings together faculty from the College of
Arts and Science, the School of Engineering, and the Medical
Center. A specialized laboratory facility maintained by VINSE
provides students in the minor with capstone experiences that
allow them to prepare and characterize a variety of nanostructured systems using in-house state-of-the-art instrumentation.
This hands-on laboratory component enhances the attractiveness of students to both employers and graduate schools.
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Minor
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The minor in nanoscience and nanotechnology requires a total
of 15 credit hours, distributed as follows.
1. CHEM 2610 or CHBE 4840. (3 hours)
2. NANO 3000. (3 hours)
3. PHYS 2660. (3 hours)
4. Elective courses. 6 hours selected from the following list of
approved subjects.
BME 4200
Principles and Applications of BioMicro		
		
ElectroMechanical Systems (BioMEMS)
BME 4500
Nanobiotechnology
CHBE 4830 Molecular Simulation
CHBE 4840 Applications of Nanostructures
CHBE 4850 Semiconductor Materials Processing
CHBE 4860 Molecular Aspects of Chemical Engineering
CHBE 4870 Polymer Science and Engineering
CHBE 4880 Corrosion Science and Engineering
CHEM 2610 Introduction to Nanochemistry
CHEM 3300 Physical Chemistry: Quantum Mechanics, 		
		
Spectroscopy, and Kinetics
CHEM 3630 Macromolecular Chemistry: Polymers, 		
		
Dendrimers, and Surface Modification
CHEM 5610 Chemistry of Inorganic Materials
EECE 4283 Principles and Models of Semiconductor
			
Devices
EECE 4284 Integrated Circuit Technology and 			
		
Fabrication
EECE 4288 Optoelectronics
EECE 4385 VLSI Design
EECE 6306 Solid-State Effects and Devices
IMS 5320
Nanoscale Science and Engineering
ME 8320
Statistical Thermodynamics
ME 8323
Introduction to Micro/Nanoelectromechanical
		
Systems
ME 8365
Micro/Nanoscale Energy Transport
MSE 6310
Atomic Arrangements in Solids
PHYS 2250 Introduction to Quantum Dynamics and 		
		
Applications I
PHYS 3640 Physics of Condensed Matter
Courses taken to satisfy relevant degree requirements for
majors in the College of Arts and Science and the School of
Engineering may also be counted toward fulfilling the minor.

School of Engineering / Scientific Computing

Scientific Computing
DIRECTORS Robert E. Bodenheimer, Thomas J. Palmeri, David A.
Weintraub
Affiliated Faculty
PROFESSORS Ralf Bennartz (Earth and Environmental Sciences),
Gautam Biswas (Electrical Engineering and Computer Science),
Mario Crucini (Economics), Peter T. Cummings (Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering), Mark N. Ellingham (Mathematics), David
Furbish (Earth and Environmental Sciences), Guilherme Gualda
(Earth and Environmental Sciences), Gordon D. Logan (Psychology),
Terry P. Lybrand (Chemistry and Pharmacology), Charles F. Maguire
(Physics), Clare M. McCabe (Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering),
Jens Meiler (Chemistry), Michael I. Miga (Biomedical Engineering),
Mark Neamtu (Mathematics), Thomas J. Palmeri (Psychology and
Neuroscience), Antonis Rokas (Biological Sciences), Jeffrey D. Schall
(Psychology and Neuroscience), Larry Schumaker (Mathematics), Paul
Sheldon (Physics), David A. Weintraub (Astronomy), Robert Weller
(Electrical Engineering)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Andreas A. Berlind (Astronomy), Robert
E. Bodenheimer (Computer Science), Kelly Holley-Bockelmann
(Astronomy), Shane Hutson (Physics), Bennett Landman (Electrical
Engineering), Haoxiang Luo (Mechanical Engineering), Kalman Varga
(Physics), Greg Walker (Mechanical Engineering), Steve Wernke
(Anthropology)
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Gerald H. Roth (Computer
Science)
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Tony Capra (Biological Sciences and
Biomedical Informatics), William Holmes (Physics and Astronomy),
Carlos Lopez (Cancer Biology), Sean Polyn (Psychology and
Neuroscience), Jennifer Trueblood (Psychology)
ADJUNCT ASSISTANT PROFESSORS William R. French (Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering), Davide Vanzo (Chemistry)

FACULTY in the School of Engineering and the College of
Arts and Science offer an interdisciplinary minor in scientific
computing to help natural and social scientists and engineers
acquire the ever-increasing computational skills that such
careers demand. The minor is administered by the School of
Engineering. Students who complete this minor will have a
toolkit that includes programming skills useful for simulating
physical, biological, and social dynamics, as well as an understanding of how to take advantage of modern software tools to
extract meaningful information from small and large datasets.
Computation is now an integral part of modern science
and engineering. In science, computer simulation allows
the study of natural phenomena impossible or intractable
through experimental means. In engineering, computer
simulation allows the analysis and synthesis of systems too
expensive, dangerous, or complex to model and build directly.
Astronomers studying the formation of massive black holes,
neuroscientists studying neural networks for human memory,
mechanical engineers studying the designs of turbines and
compressors, and electrical engineers studying the reliability
of electronics aboard spacecraft are united both in the computational challenges they face and the tools and techniques they
use to solve these challenges.
Students in the program in scientific computing are taught
techniques for understanding such complex physical, biological, and also social systems. Students are introduced to
computational methods for simulating and analyzing models
of complex systems, to scientific visualization and data mining techniques needed to detect structure in massively large
multidimensional data sets, to high performance computing
techniques for simulating models on computing clusters with

323

hundreds or thousands of parallel, independent processors and
for analyzing terabytes or more of data that may be distributed
across a massive cloud or grid storage environment.
Scientific computing at Vanderbilt is supported by faculty
and includes students from a wide range of scientific and engineering disciplines. While the content domain varies, these
disciplines often require similar computational approaches,
high-performance computing resources, and skills to simulate interactions, model real-life systems, and test competing
hypotheses. Scientific computing embodies the computational
tools and techniques for solving many of the grand challenges
facing science and engineering today.
The minor in scientific computing prepares students
for advanced coursework that combines computational
approaches with a substantive area of science or engineering. It
prepares students for independent study with a faculty member
on a research project. It prepares students for advanced study
in graduate school. It provides skills that will be attractive to
many employers after graduation.
The minor in scientific computing is distinct from the minor
in computer science. Scientific computing uses computation as
a tool to solve scientific and engineering problems in research
and application. It is more focused on simulation, numerical
techniques, high performance computing, and higher-level
methods than the minor in computer science, which is focused
on the algorithms, systems, and technologies that enable such
methods to be developed and employed.
Scientific Computing Minor
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

The minor in scientific computing requires 15 credit hours,
distributed as follows:
1. CS 1101 or 1103. (3 hours)
2. CS 2204 (CS 2201 may be substituted for 2204 with the
approval of a program director). (3 hours)
3. Scientific Computing 3250. (3 hours)
4. 6 hours of electives. Electives include courses in the Scientific
Computing (SC) minor, courses approved for SC credit that
are in another subject area, courses that meet the approval
of a director of the SC minor, and independent study with a
faculty member affiliated with the SC minor.
SC 3260
SC 3850
SC 3851
SC 3890

High Performance Computing
Independent Study
Independent Study
Special Topics

Approved elective courses by subject are listed below.
These electives provide a detailed treatment of core scientific
computing tools and techniques or combine scientific computing tools and techniques with a substantive area of science or
engineering. Electives require a significant amount of course
work that involves coding solutions to scientific or engineering
problems as opposed to running programs someone else wrote,
downloaded, or purchased.

E

324

ANTH 3261
		
ASTR 3600
ASTR 3700
ASTR 3800
BSCI 3272
BME 4310
		
CHBE 4830
CHEM 5410
CHEM 5420
		
CS 3274
EES 4760
		
EECE 6258
ECON 3050
MATH 3620
MATH 3630
MATH 3660
MATH 4600
MATH 4620
MATH 4630
MATH 9600
ME 4263
		
PHYS 2237
PHYS 3207
		
PSY 8218
PSY 8219
		
PSY 8503

vanderbilt university

Introduction to Geographic Information 		
Systems and Remote Sensing
Stellar Astrophysics
Galactic Astrophysics
Structure Formation in the Universe
Genome Science
Modeling Living Systems for Therapeutic 		
Bioengineering
Molecular Simulation
Molecular Modeling Methods
Computational Structure and Chemical 		
Biology
Modeling and Simulation
Agent- and Individual-Based Computational
Modeling
Quantitative Medical Image Analysis
Introduction to Econometrics
Introduction to Numerical Mathematics
Mathematical Modeling in Biology
Mathematical Modeling in Economics
Numerical Analysis
Linear Optimization
Nonlinear Optimization
Computing with Splines
Computational Fluid Dynamics and
Multiphysics Modeling
Computational Physics
Computational Thermodynamics and
Statistical Physics
Computational Modeling
Scientific Computing for Psychological and 		
Brain Sciences
Models of Human Memory

325

Engineering Courses
Biomedical Engineering
BME 2100. Introductory Biomechanics. [Formerly BME 101] Structure and mechanics of the musculoskeletal system and to the properties and strength of biological materials. Application of Newtonian
mechanics, statics, and strength of materials to bone, muscle, tendon,
other biological material, and medical devices. Credit offered for only
one of BME 2100 or CE 2200. Prerequisite: PHYS 1601, MATH 1301,
CS 1103. FALL. [3]
BME 2200. Biomedical Materials: Structure, Property, and Applications. [Formerly BME 103] Structure-property relationships in both
natural and synthetic, hard and soft materials. Bio-inspired materials
design, the role of self-assembly in achieving highly ordered structures,
material design and properties for emerging biomedical applications,
factors influencing biocompatibility, performance of biomaterials in
both soft and hard tissues, and biological response to implants. Prerequisite: Chem 1602, BME 2100. SPRING. [3]
BME 2201. Biomedical Engineering Ethics. [Formerly BME 201] Ethical principles in the practice of biomedical engineering: responsibility
in professional practice, health care, research and mentoring. Development of skills in perceptiveness, discernment, competency and
visualization of alternatives through case studies. Prerequisite: Junior
standing. FALL. [3] (Only available for open elective credit for biomedical engineering majors.) (Not currently offered)
BME 2210. Biomaterial Manipulation. [Formerly BME 203] Design
and characterization of biomaterials. Assessment of tissue engineering
scaffolds and nanoparticles. Manipulation of cell growth and expression. Application of mechanics and materials principles to medical and
consumer products. Laboratory exercises in tissue culture, microscopy, mechanical testing, biochemical assays, and computer modeling. Prerequisite: BME 2100, BSCI 1510/1510L. Corequisite: BME
2200. SPRING. [3]
BME 3000. Physiological Transport Phenomena. [Formerly BME
210] An introduction to the mechanics of fluids, heat transfer, and mass
transfer in living systems. Basic theories of transport phenomena are
presented and applied to mammalian and cellular physiology as well
as to the design of medical devices. Prerequisite: BME 2100, 2200 or
equivalent, MATH 2400 or 2420. [3]
BME 3100. Systems Physiology. [Formerly BME 251] An introduction
to quantitative physiology from the engineering point of view. Descriptive physiology of several organ systems (nervous, musculoskeletal,
cardiovascular, blood). Mathematical modeling and computer simulation of organ systems and physiologic control mechanisms. Prerequisite: CS 1103. Corequisite: BSCI 1510. FALL. [3]
BME 3101. Systems Physiology. [Formerly BME 252] An introduction
to quantitative physiology from the engineering point of view. Descriptive physiology of several organ systems (immune, endocrine, respiratory, renal, gastrointestinal, reproductive). Mathematical modeling and
computer simulation of organ systems and physiologic control mechanisms. Prerequisite: CS 1103. Corequisite: BSCI 1510. SPRING. [3]
BME 3110. Neuromuscular Mechanics and Physiology. [Formerly
BME 253] Quantitative characterization of the physiological and
mechanical properties of the neuromuscular system. Quantitative models of system components. Applications to fatigue, aging and development, injury and repair, and congenital and acquired diseases. Prerequisite: BME 2100, BME 3100. SPRING. [3]
BME 3200. Analysis of Biomedical Data. [Formerly BME 260] Application of modern computing methods to the statistical analysis of
biomedical data. Sampling, estimation, analysis of variance, and the
principles of experimental design and clinical trials are emphasized.
Prerequisite: MATH 2300. SPRING. [3]

BME 3300. Biomedical Instrumentation. [Formerly BME 271] Methods to determine physiological functions and variables from the point of
view of optimization in the time and frequency domain and the relation
to physiological variability. Laboratory exercises stress instrumentation
usage and data analysis. Three lectures and one laboratory. Prerequisite: EECE 2213 and 2213L. FALL, SPRING. [4]
BME 3600. Signal Measurement and Analysis. [Formerly BME 263]
Discrete time analysis of signals with deterministic and random properties and the effect of linear systems on these properties. Brief review of
relevant topics in probability and statistics and introduction to random
processes. Discrete Fourier transforms, harmonic and correlation analysis, and signal modeling. Implementation of these techniques on a computer is required. Corequisite: BME 3200 or MATH 2810. SPRING. [3]
BME 3830. Biomedical Engineering Service Learning and Leadership. [Formerly BME 249] Identification of local and global human
needs, methods of need quantification, implementation of engineering solutions, sustainability, preparation of grant proposals, leadership
principles. Independent service project required. Prerequisite: Junior
standing. FALL. [3]
BME 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly BME 240A] Independent research, either experimental or theoretical in nature or a combination of both, under the supervision of a biomedical engineering faculty
member or another faculty member approved by the course director.
Prerequisite: Consent of course director. [1-3 each semester; maximum
of 6 hours total for all semesters of BME 3860 and 3861.]
BME 3861. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly BME 240B] A continuation of the research in 3860 or research in a different area of biomedical engineering. Prerequisite: Consent of course director. [1-3
each semester; maximum of 6 hours total for all semesters of BME
3860 and 3861.]
BME 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 290A] [3]
BME 3891. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 290B] [3]
BME 3892. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 290C] [3]
BME 3893. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 290D] [3]
BME 4000. Bioelectricity. [Formerly BME 256] Cellular basis of the
electrical activity of nerve and muscle cells; action potential propagation; voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels; space, voltage, and patch
clamp; and electrical, optical, and magnetic measurements of bioelectric activity in cells, isolated tissues, intact animals, and humans. Prerequisite: MATH 2400 or 2420, BSCI 1510. FALL. [3]
BME 4100. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. [Formerly BME 285]
Fundamentals of lasers, light-tissue interaction, problem-based design
of optical instrumentation. Applications in laser surgery, disease detection, and surgical guidance. Includes hands-on experiences. Prerequisite: PHYS 1602. FALL. [3]
BME 4100L. Biomedical Optics Laboratory. [Formerly BME 285L]
Practical experience in basics of operating lasers, using optics, fiber
optics and interferometry. Computer-aided design of optical systems
and computer simulations of light tissue interaction. Application of optical concepts to biomedical problems. Prerequisite: Senior standing.
Corequisite: BME 4100. FALL. [1]
BME 4200. Principles and Applications of BioMicroElectroMechanical Systems (BioMEMS). [Formerly BME 274] The principles, design,
fabrication and application of micro- and nano-devices to instrument
and control biological molecules, living cells, and small organisms, with
a strong emphasis on development of microfabricated systems and
micro- and nano-biosensors. Students will lead discussions from the
research literature. Graduate students will prepare a research proposal
or fabricate a functioning BioMEMS device. FALL. [3]

E

326
BME 4200L. BioMicroElectroMechanical Systems Laboratory. [Formerly BME 274L] Design, fabrication, and testing of BioMEMS devices
for applications in the life sciences. Practical experience in photolithography, replica molding to fabricate microfluidic devices, and multilayer
devices to assemble microfluidic devices with active values. Corequisite: BME 4200. FALL. [1]
BME 4300. Therapeutic Bioengineering. [Formerly BME 275]
Explores the engineering aspects of treating disease or disorders. Surgical mechanics, diffusion therapies including chemical and energy diffusion, image-guided therapies, and the role of discovery and design in
the development of medical treatments. Prerequisite: EECE 2213, BME
3000. Corequisite: BME 2100, BME 3300. SPRING. [3]
BME 4310. Modeling Living Systems for Therapeutic Bioengineering. [Formerly BME 279] Introduction to computer modeling and
simulation in therapeutic bioengineering processes. Building computer
models and using modern modeling software tools. Introduction to
numerical techniques to solve differential equations and origin of mathematical models for biotransport, biomechanics, tumor/virus growth
dynamics, and model-based medical imaging techniques. Prerequisite: MATH 2400 or MATH 2420, CS 1103 or equivalent, BME 2100 or
equivalent mechanics course. SPRING. [3]
BME 4400. Foundations of Medical Imaging. [Formerly BME 258]
Physics and engineering of image formation by different modalities
used for medical applications. Concepts common to different imaging
modalities and limits of physical phenomena. Mathematical concepts
of image formation and analysis; techniques for recording images using
ionizing radiation (including CT), ultrasound, magnetic resonance, and
nuclear (including SPECT and PET). Methods of evaluating image quality. Prerequisite: PHYS 1602, 1602L, MATH 2400. Credit offered for
only one of BME 4400 and PHYS 2805. SPRING. [3]
BME 4410. Biological Basis of Imaging. [Formerly BME 276] Physical and chemical relationships between biological characteristics of
tissue and image contrast in major medical imaging modalities. Imaging modalities include x-ray, MRI, PET, and ultrasound. Applications
include neurological disorders, neurological function, cardiac function
and disease, cancer, and musculoskeletal physiology. Prerequisite:
PHYS 1602, MATH 2400. SPRING. [3]
BME 4420. Quantitative and Functional Imaging. [Formerly BME 277]
Quantitative analysis of non-invasive imaging techniques to assess the
structure and function of tissues in the body. Applications of computed
tomography, positron emission tomography, ultrasound, and magnetic
resonance imaging to tissue characterization. Measurement of lesion
volume, cardiac output, organ perfusion, brain function, and receptor
density. Prerequisite: CS 1103, PHYS 1602, MATH 2400. FALL. [3]
BME 4500. Nanobiotechnology. [Formerly BME 281] Synthesis and
characterization of nanostructured materials for use in living systems.
Clinical applications of nanoscale biosensors. Methods for single molecule detection in biological specimens. Quantitative structure/function
assessment of nanostructures in living systems. Prerequisite: BSCI
1510; BME 3000 or CHBE 3300 or ME 3224. SPRING. [3]
BME 4500L. Nanobiotechnology Laboratory. [Formerly BME 281L]
Laboratory experiments in the characterization of nanomaterial interactions with living systems. Biological surface functionalization of inorganic nanoparticles. Measurement of cultured mammalian cell response
to nanostructures. Quantitative structure/function assessment of nanostructures in living systems. Corequisite: BME 4500. SPRING. [1]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
imaging. Emphasis is on current methods, instrumentation, and equipment used in biomedical engineering; on oral presentation of results;
and on the writing of comprehensive reports. One lecture and one
three-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: BME 3100. Corequisite:
BME 3000. [3]
BME 4950. Design of Biomedical Engineering Devices and Systems I. [Formerly BME 272] Integration of the engineering and life science backgrounds of senior biomedical engineering students through
the presentation of design principles for medical devices and systems.
Design principles and case examples for biomedical electronics,
mechanical, chemical, and computing systems are presented. A fullsemester design project is required. Evaluation is conducted through
periodic oral and written presentations, and through a final written and
poster report. Corequisite: BME 3300. Prerequisite: BME 3100. [2]
BME 4951. Design of Biomedical Engineering Devices and Systems II. [Formerly BME 273] Integration of the engineering and life science backgrounds of senior biomedical engineering students through
the presentation of design principles for medical devices and systems.
Design principles and case examples for biomedical electronics,
mechanical, chemical, and computing systems are presented. A fullsemester design project is required. Evaluation is conducted through
periodic oral and written presentations, and through a final written and
poster report. Prerequisite: BME 4950. [3]
BME 4959. Senior Engineering Design Seminar. [Formerly BME 297]
Elements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools,
codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Corequisite: BME 4950. FALL. [1]
BME 5100. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. (Also listed as BME
4100) Fundamentals of lasers, light-tissue interaction, problem-based
design of optical instrumentation. Applications in laser surgery, disease
detection, and surgical guidance. Includes hands-on experiences. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4100. FALL. [3]
BME 5110. Neuromuscular Mechanics and Physiology. (Also listed
as BME 3110) Quantitative characterization of the physiological and
mechanical properties of the neuromuscular system. Quantitative models of system components. Applications to fatigue, aging and development, injury and repair, and congenital and acquired diseases. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 3110. SPRING. [3]
BME 5130. Systems Physiology. (Also listed as BME 3100) An introduction to quantitative physiology from the engineering point of view.
Descriptive physiology of several organ systems (nervous, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal). Mathematical modeling and computer simulation of organ systems and physiologic control mechanisms.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 3100. FALL. [3]
BME 5131. Systems Physiology. (Also listed as BME 3101) An introduction to quantitative physiology from the engineering point of view.
Descriptive physiology of several organ systems (blood, immune,
endocrine, respiratory, renal, reproductive). Mathematical modeling
and computer simulation of organ systems and physiologic control
mechanisms. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3101.
SPRING. [3]

BME 4600. Introduction to Tissue Engineering. [Formerly BME 280]
Basic principles, methods, and current topics in tissue engineering.
Integration of biology, materials science, and biomechanics in the
design and fabrication of engineered tissues. Biomaterials for scaffolding, stem cell applications, bioreactor design, and practical methods
for testing. Case studies and guest lectures from experts in the field.
Prerequisite: BSCI 1510; CHEM 1602 or equivalent. FALL. [3]

BME 5200. Principles and Applications of BioMicroElectroMechanical Systems (BioMEMS). (Also listed as BME 4200) The principles, design, fabrication and application of micro- and nano-devices
to instrument and control biological molecules, living cells, and small
organisms, with a strong emphasis on development of microfabricated
systems and micro- and nano-biosensors. Students will lead discussions from the research literature. Graduate students will prepare
a research proposal or fabricate a functioning BioMEMS device. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4200. FALL. [3]

BME 4900W. Biomedical Engineering Laboratory. [Formerly BME
255W] Laboratory experiments in biomechanics, thermodynamics,
biological transport, signal analysis, biological control, and biological

BME 5210. Biomaterial Manipulation. (Also listed as BME 2210)
Design and characterization of biomaterials. Assessment of tissue
engineering scaffolds and nanoparticles. Manipulation of cell growth

School of Engineering / Courses
and expression. Application of mechanics and materials principles to
medical and consumer products. Laboratory exercises in tissue culture, microscopy, mechanical testing, biochemical assays, and computer modeling. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3210.
Corequisite: BME 2200. SPRING. [3]
BME 5300. Biomedical Instrumentation. (Also listed as BME 3300)
Methods to determine physiological functions and variables from the point
of view of optimization in the time and frequency domain and the relation
to physiological variability. Laboratory exercises stress instrumentation
usage and data analysis. Three lectures and one laboratory. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3300. FALL, SPRING. [4]
BME 5400. Foundations of Medical Imaging. (Also listed as BME
4400) Physics and engineering of image formation by different modalities used for medical applications. Concepts common to different
imaging modalities and limits of physical phenomena. Mathematical
concepts of image formation and analysis; techniques for recording
images using ionizing radiation (including CT), ultrasound, magnetic
resonance, and nuclear (including SPECT and PET). Methods of evaluating image quality. No credit for students who have earned credit for
4400. SPRING. [3]
BME 5410. Biological Basis of Imaging. (Also listed as BME 4410)
Physical and chemical relationships between biological characteristics
of tissue and image contrast in major medical imaging modalities. Imaging modalities include x-ray, MRI, PET, and ultrasound. Applications
include neurological disorders, neurological function, cardiac function
and disease, cancer, and musculoskeletal physiology. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4410. SPRING. [3]
BME 5500. Nanobiotechnology. (Also listed as BME 4500) Synthesis
and characterization of nanostructured materials for use in living systems. Clinical applications of nanoscale biosensors. Methods for single
molecule detection in biological specimens. Quantitative structure/
function assessment of nanostructures in living systems. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 4500. SPRING. [3]
BME 5600. Signal Measurement and Analysis. (Also listed as BME
3600) Discrete time analysis of signals with deterministic and random
properties and the effect of linear systems on these properties. Brief
review of relevant topics in probability and statistics and introduction to
random processes. Discrete Fourier transforms, harmonic and correlation analysis, and signal modeling. Implementation of these techniques
on a computer is required. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 3600. SPRING. [3]
BME 5950. Design of Biomedical Engineering Devices and Systems
I. (Also listed as BME 4950) Integration of the engineering and life science backgrounds of senior biomedical engineering students through
the presentation of design principles for medical devices and systems. Design principles and case examples for biomedical electronics,
mechanical, chemical, and computing systems are presented. A fullsemester design project is required. Evaluation is conducted through
periodic oral and written presentations, and through a final written and
poster report. Corequisite: BME 5300. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4950. [2]
BME 5951. Design of Biomedical Engineering Devices and Systems
II. (Also listed as BME 4951) Integration of the engineering and life science backgrounds of senior biomedical engineering students through
the presentation of design principles for medical devices and systems. Design principles and case examples for biomedical electronics,
mechanical, chemical, and computing systems are presented. A fullsemester design project is required. Evaluation is conducted through
periodic oral and written presentations, and through a final written and
poster report. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4951. [3]
BME 6110. Research and Professional Development in Biomedical
Engineering. [Formerly BME 305] Database search strategies, interpreting engineering and scientific literature, communication skills, engineering design, proposal writing, preparation of engineering publications, technology transfer/intellectual property, engineering laboratory
documentation, regulatory oversight, ethics, funding. SPRING. [3]

327
BME 6301. Engineering in Surgery and Intervention: Provocative
Questions. Explores engineering and clinical aspects of treating disease or disorders by clinically-driven provocative questions. Surgical/
Interventional mechanics, locoregional therapies such as convectionenhanced delivery, neuromodulation, and ablation. Image-guided
therapies, and role of discovery and design in context of treatment.
SPRING. [3]
BME 6302. Engineering in Surgery and Intervention: Clinical Interactions. Literature review coupled with clinical immersion experience.
Literature review centers on clinical translation of engineering research
in surgical/interventional applications. Clinical immersion involves
observing surgical/interventional procedures and attending clinical
conferences. Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor. FALL. [3]
BME 7110. Laser-Tissue Interaction and Therapeutic Use of Lasers.
[Formerly BME 320] Optical and thermal aspects and models of the
interaction between laser/light and biological tissue as it is used for
therapeutic applications in medicine and biology. Issues and objectives
in therapeutic and surgical applications of lasers, overview of state-ofthe-art topics and current research. FALL. [3]
BME 7120. Optical Diagnosis: Principles and Applications. [Formerly BME 321] Applications of light and tissue optical properties for
the diagnosis of tissue pathology. Basic scientific and engineering principles for developing techniques and devices that use light to probe
cells and tissues. Recent applications of different optical diagnostic
techniques. SPRING. [3]
BME 7310. Advanced Computational Modeling and Analysis in
Biomedical Engineering. [Formerly BME 329] Survey of current topics within biomedical modeling: biotransport, biomechanics, tumor
and virus growth dynamics, model-based medical imaging techniques,
etc. Mathematical development and analysis of biomedical simulations
using advanced numerical techniques for the solution of ordinary and
partial differential equations. Emphasis will be on graduate research
related topics. SPRING. [3]
BME 7410. Quantitative Methods in Biomedical Engineering. [Formerly
BME 300] Mathematics, quantitative analysis, and computational methods for biomedical engineering applications. Topics include applied probability and statistics, signal analysis and experiment design, linear systems, Fourier transforms, and numerical modeling and analysis. FALL. [3]
BME 7413. Advanced Biomechanics. [Formerly BME 313] Application of advanced concepts in statics, dynamics, continuum mechanics,
and strength of materials to biological systems. Topics include measurement of mechanical properties of biological materials; rheological
properties of blood; mechanics of cells, bone, skeletal muscle, and soft
tissue; normal and abnormal dynamics of human movement; mechanics of articular joint movement; pulmonary mechanics; cardiac mechanics; arterial mechanics; mechanics of veins and collapsible vessels;
and mechanics of flow in the microcirculation. Prerequisite: BME 2100,
BME 3000 or equivalent. [3]
BME 7419. Engineering Models of Cellular Phenomena. [Formerly
BME 319] Application of engineering methods to model and quantify
aspects of cell physiology. Topics include receptor mediated cell processes, cell-cell signaling, cooperative barrier behavior, cell structural
components, and cell motility. SPRING. [3] (Offered alternate years)
BME 7420. Magnetic Resonance Imaging Methods. [Formerly BME
378] MR techniques to image tissue for clinical evaluation and research.
RF pulses, k-space trajectories, chemical shift, motion, flow, and relaxation. Derivation of signal equations for pulse sequence design and
analysis. Course includes hands-on experimental studies. SPRING. [3]
BME 7425. Physical Measurements on Biological Systems. [Formerly BME 325] A survey of the state-of-the-art in quantitative physical
measurement techniques applied to cellular or molecular physiology.
Topics include the basis for generation, measurement, and control of
the transmembrane potential; electrochemical instrumentation; optical
spectroscopy and imaging; x-ray diffraction for determination of macromolecular structure; magnetic resonance spectroscopy and imaging.
Prerequisite: PHYS 2250. SPRING. [3]

E

328
BME 7430. Cancer Imaging. [Formerly BME 330] Applications of
noninvasive, in vivo imaging (i.e., MRI, optical, CT, SPECT, PET, and
ultrasound) to cancer biology. Emphasis on assessing the response
of tumors to treatment using emerging and quantitative imaging techniques. Prerequisite: BME 4400 or PHYS 2805. SPRING. (Offered alternate years) [3]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
and mixtures, including equations of state, to provide background for
chemical process design and simulation. Prerequisite: MATH 2300.
SPRING. [3]

BME 7440. Neuroimaging. [Formerly BME 331] Applications of noninvasive imaging techniques including MRI, fMRI, optical, EEG, and PET
to the study of neural systems. Emphasis on the human brain, with a
focus on current scientific literature. Prerequisite: BME 4400 or PHYS
2805. FALL. (Offered alternate years) [3]

CHBE 2250. Modeling and Simulation in Chemical Engineering.
[Formerly CHBE 180] Development of chemical engineering process
models and their numerical solutions. The models include solution of
linear and non-linear equations, eigenvalue problems, differentiation,
and integration, ordinary differential equations, linear and nonlinear
regression. Chemical process simulation using commercial simulators is introduced. Prerequisite: CHBE 2100. Corequisite: CHBE 2200,
MATH 2420, CS 1103. SPRING. [3]

BME 7450. Advanced Quantitative and Functional Imaging. Analysis
of non-invasive imaging techniques to assess the structure and function of tissues in the body. Applications of computed tomography, positron emission tomography, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging to tissue characterization, including measurement of tissue volume,
microstructure, organ perfusion, blood flow, brain function, and receptor density. Prerequisite: working knowledge of MATLAB. FALL. [3]

CHBE 3200. Phase Equilibria and Stage-Based Separations. [Formerly CHBE 223] Thermodynamic principles and calculations of mixture phase equilibrium. Development of correlations to design chemical
separation processes. Applications to separation processes involving
gases, liquids, and solids such as distillation, adsorption, and extraction. Simulation of separation processes. Prerequisite: CHBE 2100,
CHBE 2200, and either CHBE 2250 or BME 2100. FALL. [3]

BME 7473. Design of Medical Products, Processes, and Services.
[Formerly BME 373] Medical design projects involving teams of graduate level engineering and management students. Projects are solicited
from industry or universities and are undertaken from the initial phase
of a design request to the end product, prototype, plan, or feasibility
analysis. Prerequisite: BME 4950 or equivalent. SPRING. [3]

CHBE 3250. Chemical Reaction Engineering. [Formerly CHBE 225]
Thermodynamic basis of chemical equilibrium. Analysis of chemical
kinetic data and application to the design of chemical reactors. Batch,
semibatch, and flow reactors are considered in both steady-state and
transient operation. Brief treatments of catalysis and physical and
chemical adsorption. Prerequisite: CHEM 2211 or 2221; CHBE 3200.
SPRING. [3]

BME 7500. Independent Study in Biomedical Engineering. [Formerly
BME 390] Study of advanced biomedical engineering topics not regularly offered in the curriculum. Consent of instructor is required. FALL,
SPRING. [3]
BME 7899. Master of Engineering Project. [Formerly BME 389]
BME 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly BME 369]
BME 8900. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 395A] [1-3]
BME 8901. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 395B] [1-3]
BME 8902. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 395C] [1-3]
BME 8903. Special Topics. [Formerly BME 395D] [1-3]
BME 8991. Biomedical Research Seminar. [Formerly BME 391] [1]
BME 8992. Biomedical Research Seminar. [Formerly BME 392] [1]
BME 8993. Biomedical Research Seminar. [Formerly BME 393] [1]
BME 8994. Biomedical Research Seminar. [Formerly BME 394] [1]
BME 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly BME 379] Research
prior to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and
for special non-degree students. [V ariable credit: 0-12]
BME 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly BME 399]

Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
CHBE 2100. Chemical Process Principles. [Formerly CHBE 161]
A foundation for advanced work in chemical engineering. Process
problems of a chemical and physico-chemical nature are considered.
Emphasis is on stoichiometry, material balances, and energy balances
required for design computation. FALL. [3]
CHBE 2150. Molecular and Cell Biology for Engineers. [Formerly
CHBE 220] Basic molecular and cellular biology principles and concepts. Application of engineering principles to further the understanding of biological systems. Protein structure and function, transcription,
translation, post-translational processing, cellular organization, molecular transport and trafficking, and cellular models. Credit given for only
one of CHBE 2150 or BSCI 1510. Prerequisite: CHEM 1602. FALL. [3]
CHBE 2200. Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics. [Formerly
CHBE 162] Application of the laws of thermodynamics to chemical
engineering systems. Entropy balances and analysis of thermodynamic
cycles. Methods of estimating thermodynamic properties of pure fluids

CHBE 3300. Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer. [Formerly CHBE
230] Principles of momentum and energy transport and their application to the analysis and design of chemical and biological engineering
systems. Prerequisite: MATH 2420. FALL. [3]
CHBE 3350. Mass Transfer and Rate-Based Separations. [Formerly
CHBE 231] Principles of mass transfer and their application to the analysis of chemical and biological engineering systems. Design of ratebased separation operations. Prerequisite: CHBE 3300. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 3600. Chemical Process Control. [Formerly CHBE 242] Design
of control systems for chemical processes. Principles of process
dynamics and control of single and multivariable systems. Frequency
and stability analyses and their effect on controller design. Prerequisite:
CHBE 3200, MATH 2420. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly CHBE 246] Opportunities for individual students to do research under the guidance of a
faculty member. Requires faculty sponsorship of the project. [1-3 each
semester]
CHBE 3861. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly CHBE 247] Opportunities for individual students to do research under the guidance of a
faculty member. Requires faculty sponsorship of the project. [1-3 each
semester]
CHBE 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly CHBE 290] [V ariable credit: 1-3
each semester]
CHBE 3900W. Chemical Engineering Laboratory I. [Formerly CHBE
228W] Laboratory experiments in momentum, energy and mass transport, focusing on instrumentation and unit operations. Statistical treatment of data, error analysis, written reports, and oral presentations are
emphasized. Two lecture hours and one 5-hour laboratory per week.
Prerequisite: CHBE 2100, CHBE 2200, CHBE 3300, and either CHBE
2250 or BME 2100. Corequisite: CHBE 3350. SPRING. [4]
CHBE 4500. Bioprocess Engineering. [Formerly CHBE 283] Application of cellular and molecular biology to process engineering to
describe the manufacture of products derived from cell cultures. Design
and scale-up of bioreactors and separation equipment. Metabolic and
protein engineering utilizing genetically engineered organisms. Prerequisite: BSCI 1510 or CHBE 2150; CHBE 3250, CHBE 3300. FALL. [3]
CHBE 4810. Metabolic Engineering. [Formerly CHBE 282] Analysis
and synthesis of metabolic networks using principles of thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport phenomena. Computational approaches for
predicting metabolic phenotypes. Experimental techniques to measure

School of Engineering / Courses

329

and manipulate key metabolic variables including pathway fluxes, protein/gene expression, enzyme regulation, and intracellular metabolite
concentrations. Prerequisite: BSCI 1510 or CHBE 2150; junior standing. SPRING. [3]

CHBE 4951W. Chemical Engineering Design Projects. [Formerly
CHBE 234W] Team-based, semester-long design project. Evaluation
through periodic oral and written presentations, a final written report,
and a poster report. Prerequisite: CHBE 4950W. SPRING. [3]

CHBE 4820. Immunoengineering. Approaches and technologies for
manipulating and studying the immune system. Topics include fundamentals of immunology, immunology tools and methods, vaccines and
immunotherapies, drug delivery principles, and materials engineering
for immunomodulation. Prerequisite: CHBE 2150 or BSCI 1510. [3]

CHBE 4959. Senior Engineering Design Seminar. [Formerly CHBE 297]
Elements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability,
risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes,
standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human
factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: Senior standing. FALL. [1]

CHBE 4830. Molecular Simulation. [Formerly CHBE 285] Introduction
to the modern tools of statistical mechanics, such as Monte Carlo and
molecular dynamics simulation, and variations. U nderstanding the methods, capabilities, and limitations of molecular simulation and applications
to simple and complex fluids relevant to the chemical and related processing industries. Prerequisite: CHBE 3200, CHEM 3300. [3]
CHBE 4840. Applications of Nanostructures. An engineering and
materials science perspective on the physical and chemical properties
of organic and inorganic nanostructures. Applications in nanomedicine
for imaging and therapy, and in power systems for solar energy conversion and energy storage. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 4850. Semiconductor Materials Processing. [Formerly CHBE
284] Introduction to the materials processing unit operations of silicon device manufacturing. Basic semiconductor physics and device
theory, production of substrates, dopant diffusion, ion implantation,
thermal oxidation and deposition processes, plasma deposition processes, photolithography, wet chemical and plasma etching, and analytical techniques. Lectures alternate with one two-hour laboratory on
a weekly basis. FALL. [3]
CHBE 4860. Molecular Aspects of Chemical Engineering. [Formerly
CHBE 286] Integration of molecular chemistry, property-based thermodynamic descriptions, and a focus on intermolecular energetics for
process analysis and product design. Case studies involve molecular,
macromolecular, supramolecular, and biomolecular systems. Prerequisite: CHEM 2211 or 2221; CHBE 2200. [3]
CHBE 4870. Polymer Science and Engineering. [Formerly CHBE
287] Macromolecular systems with emphasis on the interrelationship
of chemical, physical, and engineering properties. Further relation of
these properties to synthesis. Physicochemical and biological applications. Prerequisite: CHBE 2200, a basic understanding of organic and
physical chemistry. [3]
CHBE 4880. Corrosion Science and Engineering. [Formerly CHBE
288] Aqueous-phase metal and alloy corrosion phenomena. Fundamental chemistry and electrochemistry theories, as applied to corroding systems. Specific forms of corrosion including pitting, crevice corrosion, and galvanic corrosion. Methods for corrosion control based on
electrochemical fundamentals. Prerequisite: CHBE 3300. SPRING. [3]

CHBE 5200. Phase Equilibria and Stage-Based Separations. (Also
listed as CHBE 3200) Thermodynamic principles and calculations
of mixture phase equilibrium. Development of correlations to design
chemical separation processes. Applications to separation processes
involving gases, liquids, and solids such as distillation, adsorption, and
extraction. Simulation of separation processes. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 3200. FALL. [3]
CHBE 5250. Chemical Reaction Engineering. (Also listed as CHBE
3250) Thermodynamic basis of chemical equilibrium. Analysis of chemical kinetic data and application to the design of chemical reactors.
Batch, semibatch, and flow reactors are considered in both steadystate and transient operation. Brief treatments of catalysis and physical and chemical adsorption. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 3250. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 5300. Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer. (Also listed as CHBE
3300) Principles of momentum and energy transport and their application
to the analysis and design of chemical and biological engineering systems. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3300. FALL. [3]
CHBE 5350. Mass Transfer and Rate-Based Separations. (Also
listed as CHBE 3350) Principles of mass transfer and their application
to the analysis of chemical and biological engineering systems. Design
of rate-based separation operations. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 3350. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 5500. Bioprocess Engineering. (Also listed as CHBE 4500)
Application of cellular and molecular biology to process engineering
to describe the manufacture of products derived from cell cultures.
Design and scale-up of bioreactors and separation equipment. Metabolic and protein engineering utilizing genetically engineered organisms. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4500. FALL. [3]
CHBE 5600. Chemical Process Control. (Also listed as CHBE 3600)
Design of control systems for chemical processes. Principles of process dynamics and control of single and multivariable systems. Frequency and stability analyses and their effect on controller design. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 5600. SPRING. [3]

CHBE 4899. Atmospheric Pollution. [Formerly CHBE 280] Fundamentals of atmospheric pollution and control. The sources and nature of
gaseous and particulate air pollutants, the relation of meteorological
conditions to their dispersal, and their effects on health and materials
are discussed along with administration, standards, and control of air
pollution. Prerequisite: Junior standing. [3]

CHBE 5810. Metabolic Engineering. (Also listed as CHBE 4810)
Analysis and synthesis of metabolic networks using principles of
thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport phenomena. Computational
approaches for predicting metabolic phenotypes. Experimental techniques to measure and manipulate key metabolic variables including
pathway fluxes, protein/gene expression, enzyme regulation, and intracellular metabolite concentrations. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4810. SPRING. [3]

CHBE 4900W. Chemical Engineering Laboratory II. [Formerly CHBE
229W] Laboratory experiments in unit operations covering reactions
and separations. Interpretation of data for equipment and process
design. Writing and oral presentations are emphasized. One 5-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: CHBE 3200, CHBE 3250, CHBE 3350,
CHBE 3900W. FALL. [3]

CHBE 5820. Immunoengineering. (Also listed as CHBE 4820)
Approaches and technologies for manipulating and studying the
immune system. Topics include fundamentals of immunology, immunology tools and methods, vaccines and immunotherapies, drug delivery principles, and materials engineering for immunomodulation. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4820. [3]

CHBE 4950W. Chemical Engineering Process and Product Design.
[Formerly CHBE 233W] A systematic approach to design and safety
practices for chemical process operations. Process and product
design, economic evaluation of alternatives, ethics, and a cost and
safety analysis of a typical chemical, biological, or petroleum process
and products. Steady-state and dynamic process simulations required.
Three lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory each week. Prerequisite: CHBE 3200, CHBE 3250, CHBE 3350. FALL. [4]

CHBE 5830. Molecular Simulation. (Also listed as CHBE 4830) Introduction to the modern tools of statistical mechanics, such as Monte
Carlo and molecular dynamics simulation, and variations. U nderstanding the methods, capabilities, and limitations of molecular simulation
and applications to simple and complex fluids relevant to the chemical and related processing industries. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4830. [3]

E

330
CHBE 5840. Applications of Nanostructures. (Also listed as CHBE
4840) An engineering and materials science perspective on the physical and chemical properties of organic and inorganic nanostructures.
Applications in nanomedicine for imaging and therapy, and in power
systems for solar energy conversion and energy storage. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 5850. Semiconductor Materials Processing. (Also listed as
CHBE 4850) Introduction to the materials processing unit operations of
silicon device manufacturing. Basic semiconductor physics and device
theory, production of substrates, dopant diffusion, ion implantation, thermal oxidation and deposition processes, plasma deposition processes,
photolithography, wet chemical and plasma etching, and analytical techniques. Lectures alternate with one two-hour laboratory on a weekly
basis. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4850. FALL. [3]
CHBE 5860. Molecular Aspects of Chemical Engineering. (Also
listed as CHBE 4860) Integration of molecular chemistry, propertybased thermodynamic descriptions, and a focus on intermolecular
energetics for process analysis and product design. Case studies
involve molecular, macromolecular, supramolecular, and biomolecular
systems. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4860. [3]
CHBE 5870. Polymer Science and Engineering. (Also listed as CHBE
4870) Macromolecular systems with emphasis on the interrelationship
of chemical, physical, and engineering properties. Further relation of
these properties to synthesis. Physicochemical and biological applications. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4870. [3]
CHBE 5880. Corrosion Science and Engineering. (Also listed as
CHBE 4880) Aqueous-phase metal and alloy corrosion phenomena.
Fundamental chemistry and electrochemistry theories, as applied to
corroding systems. Specific forms of corrosion including pitting, crevice corrosion, and galvanic corrosion. Methods for corrosion control
based on electrochemical fundamentals. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 4880. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 5890. Special Topics. (Also listed as CHBE 3890) No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3890. [V ariable credit: 1-3 each
semester]
CHBE 5899. Atmospheric Pollution. (Also listed as CHBE 4899) Fundamentals of atmospheric pollution and control. The sources and nature
of gaseous and particulate air pollutants, the relation of meteorological
conditions to their dispersal, and their effects on health and materials are
discussed along with administration, standards, and control of air pollution. No credit for students who have earned credit for CHBE 4899. [3]
CHBE 6100. Applied Mathematics in Chemical Engineering. [Formerly CHBE 310] Chemical engineering applications of advanced
mathematical methods. Analytical and numerical methods for ordinary
and partial differential equations. Emphasis on recognizing the form of
a mathematical model and possible solution methods. Applications in
heat and mass transfer, chemical kinetics. FALL. [3]
CHBE 6110. Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics.
[Formerly CHBE 311] Application of the thermodynamics method to
chemical engineering problems. Development of the first, second, and
third laws of thermodynamics; estimation and correlation of thermodynamic properties; chemical and phase equilibria; irreversible thermodynamics. FALL. [3]
CHBE 6120. Applied Chemical Kinetics. [Formerly CHBE 313] Experimental methods in kinetics. Kinetics of industrial reactions and reactor
design. Absorption and catalytic systems are considered. FALL. [3]
CHBE 6200. Transport Phenomena. [Formerly CHBE 312] The theory
of non-equilibrium processes. Development of the analogy between
momentum, energy, and mass transport with applications to common
engineering problems. SPRING. [3]
CHBE 6215. Systems Analysis for Process Design and Control.
[Formerly CHBE 315] The design and control of chemical process
plants, including economic optimization under steady state and transient conditions. [3]
CHBE 6220. Surfaces and Adsorption. [Formerly CHBE 320] Surface
energy, capillarity, contact angles and wetting, surface films, insoluble

v anderbilt u niv ersity
monolayers, solid surfaces, membranes, surface area determination,
adsorption, adhesion, interface thermodynamics, friction and lubrication, interface in composites, relationships of surface to bulk properties
of materials. FALL. [3]
CHBE 6250. Professional Communication Skills for Engineers. [Formerly CHBE 395] Introduction of graduate-level written and oral communication skills for engineers. Skills needed to produce peer-reviewed
journal publications, research proposals, and research presentations
are covered. [1]
CHBE 7899. Master of Engineering Project. [Formerly CHBE 389]
CHBE 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly CHBE 369] [0-6]
CHBE 8900. Special Topics. [Formerly CHBE 397] [V ariable credit: 1-3
each semester]
CHBE 8991. Seminar. [Formerly CHBE 398] [0]
CHBE 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly CHBE 379]
Research prior to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and for special non-degree students. [V ariable credit: 0-12]
CHBE 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly CHBE 399]

Civil Engineering
CE 2100. Civil and Environmental Engineering Information Systems I.
[Formerly CE 160] Part I of a two-semester sequence course providing an
introduction to information technologies utilized by civil and environmental
engineers. Computer graphics and engineering drawings in civil and environmental engineering. Plans reading in civil engineering project development. Software tools to facilitate communication of engineering concepts
and models via modern computer technology. FALL. [2]
CE 2101. Civil and Environmental Engineering Information Systems. Information technologies used by civil and environmental engineers. Lab and project-oriented course focusing on developing skills
in engineering drawings, computer graphics, plans reading, leveling,
mapping, and GIS. Integration of CAD and surveying with team-based
projects. FALL. [3]
CE 2105. Civil and Environmental Engineering Information Systems II. [Formerly CE 161] Part II of a two-semester sequence on
information technologies used by civil and environmental engineers.
Project-oriented course focusing on developing skills in leveling,
mapping, and GIS. Integration of CAD and surveying in hands-on,
team-oriented projects addressing specific civil engineering information systems. Project work will include familiarization with, and use of,
department information systems instrumentation. Computer applications. Prerequisite: CE 2100. SPRING. [2]
CE 2120. Sustainable Design in Civil Engineering. Concepts and
methods of sustainability; resilience in civil engineering design. Best
practices. Economic, social, and environmental analysis. Ratings, indices, and measurements. Local, regional, and federal policy. Challenges
posed by climate change. Sustainability and resilience rating systems.
Applications to development and design. FALL. [3]
CE 2200. Statics. [Formerly CE 180] V ector analysis of two- and threedimensional equilibrium of particles, rigid bodies, trusses, frames, and
machines. Introduction to internal forces, shear and moment diagrams,
cables, centroids, moments of inertia, and friction. Credit offered for
only one of CE 2200 or BME 2100. Corequisite: MATH 1301, PHYS
1601. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]
CE 2205. Mechanics of Materials. [Formerly CE 182] Stress and
strain; tension, compression, and shear; Hooke's law, Mohr's circle,
combined stresses, strain-energy. Beams, columns, shafts, and continuous beams. Deflections, shear and moment diagrams. Prerequisite:
CE 2200. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]
CE 3100W. Civil and Environmental Engineering Laboratory. [Formerly CE 205W] A team project-oriented course that integrates principles of engineering design, simulation, and experimentation as applied

School of Engineering / Courses

331

to civil engineering. Emphasis on experimental design, data analysis,
and technical communication. Prerequisite: CE 2205. SPRING. [2]

Prerequisite: CE 3841 and one-page proposal approved by supervising faculty member and chair. [1-3 each semester]

CE 3200. Structural Analysis. [Formerly CE 232] Classification; nature
of loads and their calculation; analysis of statically determinate and
indeterminate beams, trusses, and frames using classical methods
(integration, moment area, energy) and matrix methods; basics of nonlinear behavior; introduction to structural analysis software. Prerequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [3]

CE 3843. Directed Study. [Formerly CE 200C] Continuation of CE 3842
in the same or another area of civil and environmental engineering. Prerequisite: CE 3842 and one-page proposal approved by supervising
faculty member and chair. [1-3 each semester]

CE 3205. Structural Design. [Formerly CE 235] Loads and their identification; issues of safety and uncertainties; steel and concrete behavior
and design of components in compression, tension, bending, shear;
application to simple structural systems; use of the AISC Steel Specifications; sustainability issues. Prerequisite: CE 3200. SPRING. [3]
CE 3250. Geotechnical Engineering. [Formerly CE 240] Origin, formation, identification, and engineering properties of soils. Discussion
on index properties, soil moisture, soil structure, compressibility, shear
strength, stress analysis, Rankine and Coulomb earth pressure theories
and bearing capacity. Laboratory experiences. Graduate credit for earth
and environmental sciences majors. Prerequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [3]
CE 3300. Risk, Reliability, and Resilience Engineering. Fundamental
concepts in probability and statistical inference. Counting methods, discrete and continuous random variables, and their associated distributions.
Sampling distributions, point estimation, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing. Applications of probability and statistics to risk, reliability, and
resilience of engineering systems. Prerequisite: MATH 2300. SPRING. [3]
CE 3501. Transportation Systems Engineering. [Formerly CE 225
and CE 3601] Planning, design, and operations of transportation systems. Particular emphasis on the design process, traffic engineering,
urban transportation planning, the analysis of current transportation
issues, and the ethics of transportation safety. SPRING. [3]
CE 3600. Environmental Engineering. [Formerly CE 226] Parameters
affecting environmental quality, including air and water pollutants;
treatment techniques to achieve drinking water quality or permit safe
discharge to the environment. Sustainability. Contaminant transport
and interactions of contaminants with the environment. Risk assessment and governmental regulations covering air, water, solid and hazardous wastes. Residuals management including hazardous and solid
waste. Prerequisite: CHEM 1601, PHYS 1601, MATH 2420. FALL. [3]
CE 3700. Fluid Mechanics. [Formerly CE 203] Physical properties of
fluids, fluid statics; integral and differential equations of conservation of
mass, energy, and momentum; principles of real fluid flows: boundary
layer effects, flow through pipes, flow in open channels, drag forces on
bodies. Emphasis on civil and environmental engineering applications.
Credit not awarded for both CE 3700 and ME 3224. Prerequisite: ME
2190, MATH 2420. FALL, SU MMER. [3]
CE 3700L. Fluid Mechanics Laboratory. [Formerly CE 204] Team
project-oriented course. Practical applications of fluid mechanics principles through laboratory exercises and field trips. Corequisite: CE
3700. FALL. [1]
CE 3705. Water Resources Engineering. [Formerly CE 227] Introduction to engineering of water resources and sewerage systems that
control the quantity, quality, timing, and distribution of water to support human habitation and the needs of the environment. Closed conduit flow, open channel flow, surface hydrology, groundwater hydrology, and contaminant transport. Prerequisite: CHEM 1601, PHYS
1601/1602, MATH 2420, CE 3700. SPRING. [3]
CE 3841. Directed Study. [Formerly CE 200A] Directed individual
study of a pertinent topic in civil and environmental engineering. May
include literature review and analysis, analytical investigations, and/or
experimental work. Prerequisite: Junior standing, completion of two
CE courses, and one-page proposal approved by supervising faculty
member and chair. [1-3 each semester]
CE 3842. Directed Study. [Formerly CE 200B] Continuation of CE
3841 in the same or another area of civil and environmental engineering.

CE 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly CE 299] [3]
CE 4100. Geographic Information Systems (GIS). [Formerly CE 259]
Principles of computerized geographic information systems (GIS) and
analytical use of spatial information. Integration with global positioning
systems (GPS) and internet delivery. Includes GIS software utilization
and individual projects. SPRING. [3]
CE 4150. Energy Systems Engineering. Physical principles of energy
conversion. Energy sources and usage. Sustainability and carrying
capacity. Systems tools and economics for energy systems. Energy
distribution and storage. Future energy system design. Prerequisite:
MATH 2300. SPRING. [3] (Not offered in 2017/2018)
CE 4200. Advanced Structural Steel Design. [Formerly CE 293]
Advanced topics in column and beam design: elastic and inelastic
analysis and design of continuous beams, composite beams, torsion design, behavior and design of bolted and welded connections,
structural planning and design of structural systems such as multistory
buildings. Prerequisite: CE 3205. FALL. [3]
CE 4205. Intelligent Transportation Systems. [Formerly CE 262] Elements of intelligent transportation system (ITS) architecture. Survey of
component systems. Analysis of potential impacts. Field operational
tests, analysis methods, deployment initiatives and results. SPRING. [3]
CE 4210. Advanced Reinforced Concrete Design. [Formerly CE 294]
Design and behavior of two-way slab systems. Yield line theory. Shear
and torsion analysis and design. Serviceability requirements and control of deflections of reinforced concrete systems. Introduction to prestressed concrete. Prerequisite: CE 3205. SPRING. [3]
CE 4211. Mechanics of Composite Materials. [Formerly CE 295]
Review of constituent materials (reinforcements, matrices, and interfaces) and fabrication processes. Prediction of properties of unidirectional and short fiber materials (micromechanics). Anisotropic elasticity
(derivation of Hooke's law for anisotropic materials, macromechanics
of laminated composites). Analysis of laminated composites based on
Classical Lamination Theory. Behavior of composite beams and plates.
Special topics (creep, fracture, fatigue, impact, and environmental
effects). Prerequisite: CE 2205, MSE 1500, MSE 1500L. SPRING. [3]
CE 4240. Infrastructure Systems Engineering. Systems-level approach
to the infrastructure of the built environment. Elements of systems engineering. Case studies of infrastructure under duress. Smart infrastructure. Transportation, building, and water and wastewater supply and
distribution systems. Infrastructure interdependencies and concepts of
smart cities. Applications to infrastructure system design. FALL. [3] (Not
offered in 2017/2018)
CE 4250. Foundation Analysis and Design. [Formerly CE 251] Study
of shallow and deep foundation elements and systems for civil engineering structures considering geotechnical, structural, and construction aspects. Corequisite: CE 3205. Prerequisite: CE 3250. SPRING. [3]
CE 4300. Reliability and Risk Case Studies. [Formerly CE 290] Review
of historical events involving successes and failures in managing system
reliability and risk from a wide range of perspectives, including design,
production, operations, organizational culture, human factors and exogenous events. Analysis of risk factors leading to event occurrence, as
well as event consequences in terms of impacts to public health, safety,
security and environmental protection. Evaluation of risk mitigation strategies based on achievable goals, technical and political feasibility, and
economic impact. Cases drawn from natural disasters, industrial accidents, and intentional acts. Prerequisite: Junior standing. FALL. [3]
CE 4400. Construction Project Management. [Formerly CE 286]
Introduction to the theory and application of the fundamentals of construction project management. The construction process and the roles

E

332
of professionals in the process. Broad overview of the construction
project from conception through completion. Application of management practices including planning, directing, cost minimizing, resource
allocation, and control of all aspects of construction operations and
resources. Credit given for only one of ENGM 3700, CE 4400 or EECE
4950. Prerequisite: CE 3205. FALL. [3]
CE 4401. Advanced Construction Project Management. [Formerly
CE 289] Current and critical issues in the construction industry, including best practices developed at the Construction Industry Institute (CII).
Guest lecturers include representatives of the CII and visiting industry
leaders. Prerequisite: CE 4400. FALL. [3]
CE 4405. Construction Estimating. [Formerly CE 287] Estimation of
material, labor, and equipment quantities, including costing and pricing of
construction projects. Application of estimating practices using real-world
examples and project estimating software. Corequisite: CE 4400. FALL. [3]
CE 4410. Construction Planning and Scheduling. [Formerly CE 288]
Fundamentals of construction planning and scheduling. Application of
management practices including: process planning; directing, costing;
resource allocation; and controlling all aspects of construction operations and resources, from pre-construction through operation and
maintenance. U se of real-world examples and project scheduling software. Prerequisite: CE 4400. SPRING. [3]
CE 4415. Construction Materials and Methods. [Formerly CE 291]
Implications of design realities, material specifications, code limitations, and regulations on the construction process. Natural and manmade materials, construction techniques, and other issues that impact
quality, constructability, and life-cycle assessment. SU MMER. [3]
CE 4420. Construction Law and Contracts. [Formerly CE 292] Review
of case studies involving successes and failures in legal principles and
landmark cases relevant to civil engineering and construction. Contracts, torts, agency and professional liability, labor laws, insurance,
expert testimony, arbitration, patents and copyrights, sureties, and ethics. Prerequisite: CE 4400. SPRING. [3]
CE 4425. Building Information Modeling. [Formerly CE 296] Generation and management of building data during its life cycle. Threedimensional, real-time, dynamic modeling to increase productivity in
building design and construction. Considerations of building geometry,
spatial relationships, geographic information, and building components. Corequisite: CE 4400. FALL. [3]
CE 4430. Building Systems and LEED. [Formerly CE 298] Design and
construction of mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and telecommunications systems in buildings. Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design (LEED) green Building Rating System(TM) building approach to
sustainability. Prerequisite: CE 4400. SPRING. [3]
CE 4500. Transportation Systems Design. [Formerly CE 255] Geometric analysis of transportation ways with particular emphasis on
horizontal and vertical curve alignment and superelevation. Design of
highways, interchanges, intersections, and facilities for pedestrians,
and air, rail, and public transportation. Prerequisite: CE 3501 or 3601.
SPRING. [3]
CE 4505. Urban Transportation Planning. [Formerly CE 256] Analytical methods and the decision-making process. Transportation studies, travel characteristic analysis, and land-use implications are applied
to surface transportation systems. Emphasis is on trip generation, trip
distribution, modal split, and traffic assignment. Planning processes in
non-urban settings are also presented. Prerequisite: CE 3501 or CE
3601. SPRING. [3]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
faculty and practicing engineers, and participation in panel discussions.
Prerequisite: Senior standing. FALL, SPRING. [1]
CE 4950. Civil Engineering Design I. [Formerly CE 248] A capstone
design course for civil engineering students. Includes project conception, design, economic evaluations, safety, reliability, ethics, social and
environmental impact, licensure, and government regulations. Projects
may be interdisciplinary, competition-oriented, or traditional civil engineering projects. Prerequisite: CE 3100W. FALL. [1]
CE 4951. Civil Engineering Design II. [Formerly CE 249] Continuation
of CE 4950. The course involves an oral presentation and the submission of a final design report. Prerequisite: CE 4950. SPRING. [2]
CE 4959. Senior Engineering Design Seminar. Elements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical
issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety,
interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes, standards, professional
organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial
design. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Corequisite: CE 4950. FALL. [1]
CE 5100. Geographic Information Systems (GIS). (Also listed as CE
4100) Principles of computerized geographic information systems (GIS)
and analytical use of spatial information. Integration with global positioning systems (GPS) and internet delivery. Includes GIS software utilization and individual projects. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 4100. SPRING. [3]
CE 5150. Energy Systems Engineering. (Also listed as CE 4150)
Physical principles of energy conversion. Energy sources and usage.
Sustainability and carrying capacity. Systems tools and economics for
energy systems. Energy distribution and storage. Future energy system
design. SPRING. [3] (Not offered in 2017/2018)
CE 5200. Advanced Structural Steel Design. (Also listed as CE 4200)
Advanced topics in column and beam design including local buckling,
composite beams, plate girders, and torsion design. Behavior and design
of bolted and welded connections. Structural planning and design of
structural systems such as multistory buildings including computer applications. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4200. FALL. [3]
CE 5210. Advanced Reinforced Concrete Design. (Also listed as CE
4210) Design and behavior of two-way slab systems. Yield line theory.
Shear and torsion analysis and design. Serviceability requirements and
control of deflections of reinforced concrete systems. Introduction to
prestressed concrete. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 4210. SPRING. [3]
CE 5240. Infrastructure Systems Engineering. (Also listed as CE
4240) Systems-level approach to the infrastructure of the built environment. Elements of systems engineering. Case studies of infrastructure
under duress. Smart infrastructure. Transportation, building, and water
and wastewater supply and distribution systems. Infrastructure interdependencies and concepts of smart cities. Applications to infrastructure
system design. FALL. [3] (Not offered in 2017/2018))
CE 5250. Foundation Analysis and Design. (Also listed as CE 4250)
Study of shallow and deep foundation elements and systems for civil
engineering structures. Soil exploration and site investigation. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 4250. SPRING. [3]

CE 4510. Traffic Engineering. [Formerly CE 257] Analysis of the characteristics of traffic, including the driver, vehicle, volumes, capacities,
congestion, roadway conditions, complete streets and accidents. Traffic regulations, markings, signing, signalization, and safety programs
are also discussed. Prerequisite: CE 3501 or CE 3601. FALL. [3]

CE 5300. Reliability and Risk Case Stud. (Also listed as CE 4300)
Review of historical events involving successes and failures in managing system reliability and risk from a wide range of perspectives,
including design, production, operations, organizational culture, human
factors and exogenous events. Analysis of risk factors leading to event
occurrence, as well as event consequences in terms of impacts to
public health, safety, security and environmental protection. Evaluation
of risk mitigation strategies based on achievable goals, technical and
political feasibility, and economic impact. Cases drawn from natural
disasters, industrial accidents, and intentional acts. No credit for students who have earned credit for CE 4300. FALL. [3]

CE 4900. Civil and Environmental Engineering Seminar. [Formerly
CE 252] A seminar designed to introduce students to current technical and professional issues through literature discussions, seminars by

CE 5400. Construction Project Management. (Also listed as CE
4400) Introduction to the theory and application of the fundamentals
of construction project management. The construction process and

School of Engineering / Courses
the roles of professionals in the process. Broad overview of the construction project from conception through completion. Application of
management practices including planning, directing, cost minimizing,
resource allocation, and control of all aspects of construction operations and resources. No credit for students who have earned credit for
4400. FALL. [3]
CE 5401. Advanced Construction Project Management. (Also listed
as CE 4401) Current and critical issues in the construction industry,
including best practices developed at the Construction Industry Institute (CII). Guest lecturers include representatives of the CII and visiting industry leaders. No credit for students who have earned credit for
4401. FALL. [3]
CE 5405. Construction Estimating. (Also listed as CE 4405) Estimation
of material, labor, and equipment quantities, including costing and pricing of construction projects. Application of estimating practices using
real-world examples and project estimating software. Corequisite: CE
5400. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4405. FALL. [3]
CE 5410. Construction Planning and Scheduling. (Also listed as CE
4410) Fundamentals of construction planning and scheduling. Application
of management practices including: process planning; directing, costing;
resource allocation; and controlling all aspects of construction operations
and resources, from pre-construction through operation and maintenance. U se of real-world examples and project scheduling software. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4410. SPRING. [3]
CE 5415. Construction Materials and Methods. (Also listed as CE
4415) Implications of design realities, material specifications, code
limitations, and regulations on the construction process. Natural and
man-made materials, construction techniques, and other issues that
impact quality, constructability, and life-cycle assessment. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 4415. SU MMER. [3]
CE 5420. Construction Law and Contracts. (Also listed as CE 4420)
Review of case studies involving successes and failures in legal principles and landmark cases relevant to civil engineering and construction.
Contracts, torts, agency and professional liability, labor laws, insurance,
expert testimony, arbitration, patents and copyrights, sureties, and ethics. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4420. SPRING. [3]
CE 5425. Building Information Modeling. (Also listed as CE 4425)
Generation and management of building data during its life cycle. Threedimensional, real-time, dynamic modeling to increase productivity in
building design and construction. Considerations of building geometry,
spatial relationships, geographic information, and building components.
No credit for students who have completed 4425. FALL. [3]
CE 5430. Building Systems and LEED. (Also listed as CE 4430) Design
and construction of mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and telecommunications systems in buildings. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) green Building Rating System(TM) building approach
to sustainability. No credit for students who have earned credit for
4430. SPRING. [3]
CE 5500. Transportation System Design. (Also listed as CE 4500) Geometric analysis of transportation ways with particular emphasis on horizontal and vertical curve alignment. Design of highways, interchanges,
intersections, and facilities for air, rail, and public transportation. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4500. SPRING. [3]
CE 5505. Urban Transportation Planning. (Also listed as CE 4505)
Analytical methods and the decision-making process. Transportation
studies, travel characteristic analysis, and land-use implications are
applied to surface transportation systems. Emphasis is on trip generation, trip distribution, modal split, and traffic assignment. Computerized
planning programs are used. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 4505. SPRING. [3]
CE 5510. Traffic Engineering. (Also listed as CE 4510) Analysis of the
characteristics of traffic, including the driver, vehicle, volumes, speeds,
capacities, roadway conditions, and accidents. Traffic regulation, control, signing, signalization, and safety programs are also discussed. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4510. FALL. [3]

333
CE 5999. Special Topics. (Also listed as CE 3890) No credit for students who have earned credit for 3890. [3]
CE 6200. Continuum Mechanics. [Formerly CE 301] Mathematical
preliminaries: tensor algebra, tensor calculus, coordinate transformation, principal values and directions. Kinematics of continuum: motion
and deformation, infinitesimal and finite strain theory, balance of mass.
Stress and integral formulations: traction on planes, stress invariants
and failure theories, Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensors, balance of momentum, stress power. Elastic solid: linear isotropic and anisotropic elasticity, engineering material constants, plane elastic waves, non-linear
isotropic elasticity. FALL. [3]
CE 6205. Theory of Inelasticity. [Formerly CE 302] Physical mechanisms of deformation and failure. Modern theories of plasticity, viscoplasticity and continuum damage mechanics. Thermodynamics of plasticity and damage processes. Numerical and computational aspects of
inelastic deformation mechanisms in solids and structures. SPRING. [3]
CE 6210. Finite Element Analysis. [Formerly CE 307] Discrete modeling of problems of the continua. Mathematical basis of finite element
method-weighted residual and variational concepts. Finite element formulations; displacement, force, and mixed methods. 1-D problems of
the continua and finite element solution-C0 and C1 elements, eigenvalue
and transient problems. Error checks and control. Mapping, shape functions, numerical quadrature, and solution of equations. Formulation of
2-D problems (single and multi-field)-mapping and shape functions,
triangular and quad elements with straight or curved boundaries. 3-D
elements, singular problems, buckling, and nonlinear problems. Error
estimation and quality control. Computer implementation. Commercial
packages. Prerequisite: MATH 2410, MATH 3620. FALL. [3]
CE 6212. Advanced Computational Mechanics. [Formerly CE 308]
Basics of nonlinear mechanics—geometric and material nonlinearities.
Discrete Lagrangian, Eulerian and other formulations. Nonlinear material models. Numerical solution algorithms in space and time. Solution
of nonlinear (second-order and higher) problems. Multi-disciplinary
problems. Error estimation and adaptive model improvement. Introduction to multi-scale modeling and atomistic/continuum coupling. Prerequisite: CE 6210. SPRING. [3]
CE 6215. Structural Dynamics and Control. [Formerly CE 309] Analysis
of single- and multi-degree-of-freedom systems. Modal superposition
method. Time and frequency domain analyses. Numerical methods and
nonlinear dynamic analysis. Application to structures subject to earthquake and impact forces. Elements of feedback control systems. Control
of lumped parameter systems. Active, passive, and hybrid mass dampers. Application to simple building and bridge structures. SPRING. [3]
CE 6300. Probabilistic Methods in Engineering Design. [Formerly CE
310] Applications of probabilistic methods in the analysis and synthesis
of engineering systems. Review of basic probability concepts, random
variables and distributions, modeling and quantification of uncertainty,
testing the validity of assumed models, linear regression and correlation analyses, Monte Carlo simulation, reliability analysis and reliabilitybased design. Prerequisite: MATH 2410. FALL. [3]
CE 6305. Engineering Design Optimization. [Formerly CE 311] Methods for optimal design of engineering systems. Optimization under
uncertainty, reliability-based design optimization, robust design, multidisciplinary problems, multi-objective optimization. Discrete and continuous design variables, advanced numerical algorithms, and formulations and strategies for computational efficiency. Practical applications
and term projects in the student's area of interest. Prerequisite: MATH
4630, MATH 4620 or CE 6300. [3]
CE 6310. Uncertainty Quantification. [Formerly CE 313] Computational methods for analysis and design of modern engineering systems
under uncertainty. Emphasis on epistemic uncertainty due to data and
models. Topics include stochastic finite elements; time-dependent reliability; Bayesian methods and networks; surrogate modeling; advanced
simulation; global sensitivity analysis; model verification, validation, and
calibration; and optimization under uncertainty. Applications to practical engineering systems. Prerequisite: CE 6300. SPRING. [3]

E

334
CE 6313. Multiscale Modeling. [Formerly CE 314] State-of-the-art and
emerging multiscale computational methods for modeling of mechanics,
transport, and materials phenomena. Principles of information transfer
between multiple spatial and temporal scales, including atomistic-tocontinuum coupling, continuum-to-continuum coupling, and bridging of
time scales. Enrichment methods including generalized finite elements,
partition of unity, variational multiscale methods. FALL. [3]
CE 6318. Prestressed Concrete. [Formerly CE 318] Behavior and
design of statically determinate prestressed concrete structures under
bending moment, shear, torsion, and axial load effects. Design of statically determinate prestressed structures such as continuous beams,
frames, slabs and shells. Creep and shrinkage effects and deflections
of prestressed concrete structures. Application to the design and construction of bridges and buildings. Prerequisite: CE 3205. [3]
CE 6351. Public Transportation Systems. [Formerly CE 351] Comprehensive study of public transportation, with emphasis on planning,
management, and operations; paratransit, ridesharing, and rural public
transportation systems. Prerequisite: CE 4505. SPRING. [3]
CE 6353. Airport Planning and Design. [Formerly CE 353] Integration and application of the principles of airport master planning from
the beginning stages of site selection through actual design of an airport facility. Specific study topics address demand forecasting, aircraft
characteristics, capacity analyses, and geometric design of runways,
terminals, and support facilities. Prerequisite: CE 3601. [3]
CE 6355. Advanced Transportation Design. [Formerly CE 355] Indepth view of the transportation design process. Complex transportation design problems and solutions, with the use of computer-based
analytical design tools. Comprehensive design projects. Prerequisite:
CE 4500. SPRING. [3]
CE 6356. Advanced Transportation Planning. [Formerly CE 356] A
continuation of the concepts from CE 4505, with emphasis on analytical techniques used in forecasting travel. U se of computer-based
models, along with transportation and energy contingency planning
methods. Prerequisite: CE 4505. SPRING. [3]
CE 6357. Theory of Traffic Flow. [Formerly CE 357] A study of traffic
flow from the perspective of probability as applied to highway, intersection and weaving capacities. Discrete and continuous flow, vehicle
distributions, queuing, and simulation. Prerequisite: CE 4510. [3]
CE 6359. Emerging Information Systems Applications. [Formerly CE
359] Role of emerging information systems technologies in improving
productivity and efficiency and in managing engineering operations.
Design of integrated approaches to enhance the speed, accuracy,
reliability, and quantity of information available for decision support.
Emphasis on case studies of innovative applications in transportation
and manufacturing, leading to individual and group projects requiring
new product development. Prerequisite: Background in transportation
or manufacturing operations. FALL. [3]
CE 7899. Master of Engineering Project. [Formerly CE 389]
CE 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly CE 369] [0-6]
CE 8000. Individual Study of Civil Engineering Problems. [Formerly
CE 325A] Literature review and analysis of special problems under faculty supervision. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [1-4 each semester]
CE 8001. Individual Study of Civil Engineering Problems. [Formerly
CE 325B] Literature review and analysis of special problems under faculty supervision. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [1-4 each semester]
CE 8002. Individual Study of Civil Engineering Problems. [Formerly
CE 325C] Literature review and analysis of special problems under faculty supervision. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [1-4 each semester]
CE 8300. Reliability and Risk Engineering Seminar. [Formerly CE
371A] Perspectives on reliability and risk assessment and management
of multi-disciplinary engineering systems. Topics on infrastructure and
environmental systems, mechanical, automotive, and aerospace systems; network systems (power distribution, water and sewage systems,
transportation etc.); manufacturing and construction; and electronic
and software systems. FALL, SPRING. [1]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
CE 8301. Reliability and Risk Engineering Seminar. [Formerly CE
371B] Seminars by expert speakers provide a wide range of perspectives on reliability and risk assessment and management of multidisciplinary engineering systems. Topics on infrastructure and environmental systems; mechanical, automotive, and aerospace systems; network
systems (power distribution, water and sewage systems, transportation, etc.); manufacturing and construction; and electronic and software
systems. FALL, SPRING. [1]
CE 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly CE 379] Research prior
to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and for
special non-degree students. [V ariable credit: 0-12]
CE 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly CE 399]

Environmental Engineering
ENVE 3610. Sustainable Development. [Formerly ENV E 220A] Quantitative investigation of the role of adequate and renewable resources
for continual economic development. Past and present resource challenges, influences of indigenous, national, and international cultures,
land use practices, social policy, and economic strategies on infrastructure development. Future challenges posed by climate change,
and how market- and government-based policies may be applied in
conditions of uncertainty to encourage sustainable development.
Intended to be followed by ENV E 3611. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 3611. Sustainable Development Field Experience. [Formerly
ENV E 220B] Through lectures, research projects, and service-learning
opportunities, students will reflect on themes from ENV E 3610 and
apply them to work in the field. Students will design and conduct quantitative-oriented research projects in collaboration with faculty mentors
and international partners. Prerequisite: ENV E 3610. SU MMER. [1-3]
ENVE 3612. Sustainable Development Research. [Formerly ENV E
220C] A quantitative, project- and research-based seminar drawing on
student experiences and learning in ENV E 3610 and ENV E 3611. Prerequisite: ENV E 3611. FALL. [3]
ENVE 4305. Enterprise Risk Management. [Formerly ENV E 296]
Development of an organization-wide risk management program for
protecting human health, the environment and business continuity.
Focus on defining an all-hazards risk management process and program implementation, performing risk assessments, determining and
selecting appropriate risk reduction strategies, and influencing risk
management decisions internally and externally. Applications drawn
from natural disasters, man-made accidents and intentional acts. Prerequisite: Senior standing. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4600. Environmental Chemistry. [Formerly ENV E 271] Theoretical aspects of physical, organic, and inorganic chemistry applied to
environmental engineering. Estimation of chemical parameters based
on thermodynamic and structural activity relationships, kinetics of
chemical reactions, equilibrium processes in the environment, including the carbonate system, metal complexation and precipitation. Prerequisite: CHEM 1602. FALL. [3]
ENVE 4605. Environmental Thermodynamics, Kinetics, and Mass
Transfer. [Formerly ENVE 270] Examination of fundamental environmental
processes and phenomena. U ses of equilibrium phenomena, process rate
and mass transport phenomena to solve a broad range of environmental
problems. Prerequisite: CHEM 1602, MATH 2420, CE 3600. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4610. Biological Processes in Environmental Systems. [Formerly ENV E 272] Principles of biology and their application to wastewater treatment processes with emphasis on microbial ecology, bioenergetics, and the role of chemical structure in biodegradability. U tilization
kinetics of inhibitory and non-inhibitory organic compounds. Biological
process analysis and design (aerobic and anaerobic) for municipal and
industrial wastewaters, using a mass balance approach. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4615. Environmental Assessments. [Formerly ENV E 264]
Design and conduct of environmental assessments to evaluate risks
posed by infrastructure systems or environmental contamination.
Impact analyses for sources, infrastructure modifications, due diligence

School of Engineering / Courses
environmental audits, and contaminated site remedial investigations.
Prerequisite: Senior standing. FALL. [3]
ENVE 4620. Environmental Characterization and Analysis. [Formerly ENV E 273] Acquisition and interpretation of environmental data.
Principles of chemical measurement, sample collection and sample
program design; laboratory safety and good laboratory practices; analytical instrumentation and methods; quality assurance and quality control; and statistical interpretation of data. Hands-on experience through
demonstrations featuring state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation.
Prerequisite: CE 3600, ENV E 4600. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4625. Environmental Separations Processes. [Formerly ENV E
277 and ENV E 4716] Fundamentals and applications of separations
processes relevant to water and wastewater treatment and other environmental systems. Topics include coagulation/flocculation, sedimentation, granular filtration; advanced separation processes such as various membrane processes, absorption, ion exchange, thermally driven
separations, and electrically driven separations including electrodialysis and capacitive deionization. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4700. Energy and Water Resources. [Formerly ENV E 254]
Scientific, technological, philosophical, and social issues surrounding
approaches to carbon-based energy and alternative energy resources,
management of carbon through sequestration, supplying and treating
water for agriculture, communities, and industry, and changing climate
impacts on regional distribution of water resources. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4705. Physical Hydrology. [Formerly ENVE 252] Development of
fundamental bases of hydrological processes. Land-atmosphere processes, surface-water flows, soil moisture dynamics, and groundwater
flows. Exposition of physical principles, their embodiment in mathematical
models, and their use in interpreting observations in the field and laboratory.
Prerequisite: CE 3700 or ME 3224 or CHBE 3300 or EES 4550. FALL. [3]
ENVE 4710. Hydrology. [Formerly ENV E 262] The hydrologic cycle,
study of precipitation, evapotranspiration, hydrometeorology, stream
flow, flood flow, flood routing, storm sewer design, detention basin
design, and water quality. Prerequisite: CE 3700, CE 3705. FALL. [3]
ENVE 4715. Groundwater Hydrology. [Formerly ENV E 276] The
occurrence and flow of ground water. Basic concepts of the effects
of varying permeability and capillarity on seepage flow. Flow toward
wells, through dikes, and beneath dams. Prerequisite: MATH 2420, CE
3700. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4720. Surface Water Quality Modeling. [Formerly ENV E 274]
Analysis of physical, chemical, biological, and physiological contaminants in streams, lakes, and estuaries, and surface water/groundwater
interfaces. Analytical and numerical modeling techniques. One- and
two-dimension computer simulation of surface water quality. Prerequisite: ENV E 4605. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 4800. Introduction to Nuclear Environmental Engineering.
[Formerly ENV E 285] The nuclear fuel cycle and environmental and
societal impacts associated with its traditional implementation. Technical and programmatic challenges associated with fuel production,
and waste management including processing, storage, transportation,
decontamination, decommissioning, and environmental restoration.
Technologies and approaches for reducing impacts of the nuclear fuel
cycle. Prerequisite: Senior or graduate standing. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5305. Enterprise Risk Management. (Also listed as ENV E
4305) Development of an organization-wide risk management program
for protecting human health, the environment and business continuity.
Focus on defining an all-hazards risk management process and program implementation, performing risk assessments, determining and
selecting appropriate risk reduction strategies, and influencing risk
management decisions internally and externally. Applications drawn
from natural disasters, man-made accidents and intentional acts. No
credit for students who have earned credit for ENV E 4305. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5600. Environmental Chemistry. (Also listed as ENV E 4600)
Theoretical aspects of physical, organic, and inorganic chemistry
applied to environmental engineering. Estimation of chemical parameters based on thermodynamic and structural activity relationships,

335
kinetics of chemical reactions, equilibrium processes in the environment, including the carbonate system, metal complexation and precipitation. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4600. FALL. [3]
ENVE 5605. Environmental Thermodynamics, Kinetics, and Mass
Transfer. (Also listed as ENV E 4605) Examination of fundamental environmental processes and phenomena that provide the analytical tools
necessary to solve a broad range of environmental problems. These
tools include equilibrium phenomena, process rate and mass transport
phenomena. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4605.
SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5610. Biological Processes in Environmental Systems. (Also
listed as ENV E 4610) Principles of biology and their application to
wastewater treatment processes with emphasis on microbial ecology,
bioenergetics, and the role of chemical structure in biodegradability.
U tilization kinetics of inhibitory and non-inhibitory organic compounds.
Biological process analysis and design (aerobic and anaerobic) for
municipal and industrial wastewaters, using a mass balance approach.
No credit for students who have earned credit for ENV E 4610. SPRING.
[3]
ENVE 5615. Environmental Assessments. (Also listed as ENV E 4615)
Design and conduct of environmental assessments to evaluate risks
posed by infrastructure systems or environmental contamination.
Impact analyses for sources, infrastructure modifications, due diligence
environmental audits, and contaminated site remedial investigations.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 4615. FALL. [3]
ENVE 5620. Environmental Characterization and Analysis. (Also
listed as ENV E 4620) Acquisition and interpretation of environmental
data. Principles of chemical measurement, sample collection and sample program design; laboratory safety and good laboratory practices;
analytical instrumentation and methods; quality assurance and quality control; and statistical interpretation of data. Hands-on experience
through demonstrations featuring state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4620.
SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5625. Environmental Separations Processes. (Also listed as
ENV E 4625) Fundamentals and applications of separations processes
relevant to water and wastewater treatment and other environmental
systems. Topics include coagulation/flocculation, sedimentation, granular filtration; advanced separation processes such as various membrane processes, absorption, ion exchange, thermally driven separations, and electrically driven separations including electrodialysis and
capacitive deionization. No credit for students who have earned credit
for ENV E 4625. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5700. Energy and Water Resources. (Also listed as ENV E 4700)
Scientific, technological, philosophical, and social issues surrounding
approaches to carbon-based energy and alternative energy resources,
management of carbon through sequestration, supplying and treating
water for agriculture, communities, and industry, and changing climate
impacts on regional distribution of water resources. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4700. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5705. Physical Hydrology. (Also listed as ENV E 4705) Development of fundamental bases of hydrological processes. Landatmosphere processes, surfacewater flows, soil moisture dynamics, and
groundwater flows. Exposition of physical principles, their embodiment
in mathematical models, and their use in interpreting observations in
the field and laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 4705. FALL. [3]
ENVE 5710. Hydrology. (Also listed as ENV E 4710) The hydrologic
cycle, study of precipitation, evapotranspiration, hydrometeorology,
stream flow, flood flow, flood routing, storm sewer design, detention basin design, and water quality. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4710. FALL. [3]
ENVE 5715. Groundwater Hydrology. (Also listed as ENV E 4715) The
occurrence and flow of ground water. Basic concepts of the effects of
varying permeability and capillarity on seepage flow. Flow toward wells,

E

336
through dikes, and beneath dams. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4715. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5720. Surface Water Quality Modeling. (Also listed as ENV E
4720) Analysis of physical, chemical, biological, and physiological contaminants in streams, lakes, and estuaries, and surface water/groundwater interfaces. Analytical and numerical modeling techniques. Oneand two-dimension computer simulation of surface water quality. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4720. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 5800. Introduction to Nuclear Environmental Engineering.
(Also listed as ENV E 4800) The nuclear fuel cycle and environmental and
societal impacts associated with its traditional implementation. Technical
and programmatic challenges associated with fuel production, and waste
management including processing, storage, transportation, decontamination, decommissioning, and environmental restoration. Technologies
and approaches for reducing impacts of the nuclear fuel cycle. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 4800. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 6800. Nuclear Facilities Life Cycle Engineering. [Formerly
ENV E 330] The life cycle (including siting, licensing, construction, operations and decommissioning) of the nuclear facilities that comprise the
nuclear fuel cycle--from mining uranium ore through the potential recycling of used nuclear fuel. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 6805. Storage, Treatment and Disposal of Radioactive Waste.
[Formerly ENV E 332] Evolution of current domestic and international
approaches, including waste forms, classification, storage and disposal locations, and environmental and safety assessments. FALL. [3]
ENVE 7531. Nuclear Chemistry and Processes. [Formerly ENV E 331]
Chemistry and chemical processing of the actinides and important fission products and byproducts. Development of nuclear chemical engineering processes for these materials. SPRING. [3]
ENVE 7533. Nuclear Process Safety. [Formerly ENV E 333] Approaches
for evaluating the safety of nuclear radiochemical processing systems.
Safety analysis practices from the chemical industry, the nuclear power
community, and the U nited States nuclear weapons complex, and other
quantitative and qualitative risk assessment methods. FALL. [3]
ENVE 7534. Nuclear Environmental Regulation, Law and Practice.
[Formerly ENV E 334] Environmental laws and regulations governing
radionuclides and radioactive waste, including those concerning hazardous chemicals and wastes and those impacting commercial nuclear
fuel cycle facilities and former nuclear weapons and materials sites.
Interplay between regulatory agencies such as the U S Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the U S Environmental Protection Agency, and the
states. Self-regulation of activities by the U .S. Department of Energy.
SU MMER. [3]
ENVE 7899. Master of Engineering Project. [Formerly ENV E 389]
ENVE 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly ENV E 369] [0-6]
ENVE 8000. Individual Study. [Formerly ENV E 325A] Literature review
and analysis, or laboratory investigation of special problems under faculty supervision. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [V ariable credit: 1-4 each
semester]
ENVE 8001. Individual Study. [Formerly ENV E 325B] Literature review
and analysis, or laboratory investigation of special problems under faculty supervision. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [V ariable credit: 1-4 each
semester]
ENVE 8002. Individual Study. [Formerly ENV E 325C] Literature review
and analysis, or laboratory investigation of special problems under faculty supervision. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [V ariable credit: 1-4 each
semester]
ENVE 8300. Research Methods Seminar. Coverage of graduatelevel skills required to conduct critical review of a topic and produce
research proposals, research presentations, and peer-reviewed journal
publications. Includes discussion of responsible conduct in research
and ethics. FALL. [0]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
ENVE 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly ENV E 379] Research
prior to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and
for special non-degree students. [V ariable credit: 0-12]
ENVE 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly ENV E 399]

Computer Science
CS 1101. Programming and Problem Solving. [Formerly CS 101] An
intensive introduction to algorithm development and problem solving
on the computer. Structured problem definition, top down and modular
algorithm design. Running, debugging, and testing programs. Program
documentation. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 1103. Introductory Programming for Engineers and Scientists.
[Formerly CS 103] An introduction to problem solving on the computer.
Intended for students other than computer science and computer engineering majors. Methods for designing programs to solve engineering
and science problems using MATLAB. Generic programming concepts.
FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 1151. Computers and Ethics. [Formerly CS 151] Analysis and discussion of problems created for society by computers, and how these
problems pose ethical dilemmas to both computer professionals and
computer users. Topics include: computer crime, viruses, software
theft, ethical implications of life-critical systems. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 2201. Program Design and Data Structures. [Formerly CS 201]
Continuation of CS 1101. The study of elementary data structures,
their associated algorithms and their application in problems; rigorous development of programming techniques and style; design and
implementation of programs with multiple modules, using good data
structures and good programming style. Prerequisite: CS 1101. FALL,
SPRING. [3]
CS 2204. Program Design and Data Structures for Scientific Computing. [Formerly CS 204] Data Structures and their associated algorithms in application to computational problems in science and engineering. Time and memory complexity; dynamic memory structures;
sorting and searching; advanced programming and program-solving
strategies; efficient software library use. Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1103.
SPRING. [3]
CS 2212. Discrete Structures. [Formerly CS 212] A broad survey of
the mathematical tools necessary for an understanding of computer
science. Topics covered include an introduction to sets, relations, functions, basic counting techniques, permutations, combinations, graphs,
recurrence relations, simple analysis of algorithms, O-notation, Boolean algebra, propositional calculus, and numeric representation. Prerequisite: A course in computer science or two semesters of calculus.
FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 2231. Computer Organization. [Formerly CS 231] The entire hierarchical structure of computer architecture, beginning at the lowest level
with a simple machine model (e.g., a simple von Neumann machine).
Processors, process handling, IO handling, and assembler concepts.
Graduate credit not given for computer science majors. Prerequisite:
CS 2201. Corequisite: EECE 2116, EECE 2116L. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 3250. Algorithms. [Formerly CS 250] Advanced data structures,
systematic study and analysis of important algorithms for searching;
sorting; string processing; mathematical, geometrical, and graph algorithms, classes of P and NP, NP-complete and intractable problems.
Prerequisite: CS 2201, CS 2212. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 3251. Intermediate Software Design. [Formerly CS 251] High
quality development and reuse of architectural patterns, design patterns, and software components. Theoretical and practical aspects of
developing, documenting, testing, and applying reusable class libraries and object-oriented frameworks using object-oriented and component-based programming languages and tools. Prerequisite: CS 2201.
FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 3252. Theory of Automata, Formal Languages, and Computation. [Formerly CS 252] Finite-state machines and regular expressions.

School of Engineering / Courses
Context-free grammars and languages. Pushdown automata. Turing
machines. U ndecideability. The Chomsky hierarchy. Computational
complexity. Prerequisite: CS 2212. SPRING. [3]
CS 3258. Introduction to Computer Graphics. [Formerly CS 258]
Featuring 2D rendering and image-based techniques, 2D and 3D transformations, modeling, 3D rendering, graphics pipeline, ray-tracing, and
texture-mapping. Prerequisite: one of MATH 2410, 2400, 2501 or 2600;
CS 3251. FALL. [3]
CS 3259. Project in Computer Animation Design and Technology. [Formerly CS 259] Introduction to the principles and techniques
of computer animation. Students work in small groups on the design,
modeling, animation, and rendering of a small computer animation project. Topics include storyboarding, camera control, skeletons, inverse
kinematics, splines, keyframing, motion capture, dynamic simulation,
particle systems, facial animation, and motion perception. Prerequisite:
CS 2201; one of MATH 2410, 2400, 2501, or 2600. FALL. [3]
CS 3265. Introduction to Database Management Systems. [Formerly CS 265] Logical and physical organization of databases. Data
models and query languages, with emphasis on the relational model
and its semantics. Concepts of data independence, security, integrity,
concurrency. Prerequisite: CS 2201. [3]
CS 3270. Programming Languages. [Formerly CS 270] General criteria for design, implementation, and evaluation of programming languages. Historical perspective. Syntactic and semantic specification,
compilations, and interpretation processes. Comparative studies of
data types and data control, procedures and parameters, sequence
control, nesting, scope and storage management, run-time representations. Problem solving using non-standard languages. Prerequisite: CS
2231. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 3274. Modeling and Simulation. [Formerly CS 274] General theory
of modeling and simulation of a variety of systems: physical processes,
computer systems, biological systems, and manufacturing processes.
Principles of discrete-event, continuous, and hybrid system modeling,
simulation algorithms for the different modeling paradigms, methodologies for constructing models of a number of realistic systems, and
analysis of system behavior. Computational issues in modeling and
analysis of systems. Stochastic simulations. Prerequisite: CS 2201. [3]
CS 3276. Compiler Construction. [Formerly CS 276] Review of programming language structures, translation, loading, execution, and storage allocation. Compilation of simple expressions and statements. Organization of a compiler including compile-time and run-time symbol tables,
lexical scan, syntax scan, object code generation, error diagnostics,
object code optimization techniques, and overall design. U se of a highlevel language to write a complete compiler. Prerequisite: CS 2231. [3]
CS 3281. Principles of Operating Systems I. [Formerly CS 281]
Resource allocation and control functions of operating systems.
Scheduling of processes and processors. Concurrent processes and
primitives for their synchronization. U se of parallel processes in designing operating system subsystems. Methods of implementing parallel
processes on conventional computers. V irtual memory, paging, protection of shared and non-shared information. Structures of data files
in secondary storage. Security issues. Case studies. Prerequisite: CS
2231, CS 3251. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 3282. Principles of Operating Systems II. [Formerly CS 282] Projects involving modification of a current operating system. Lectures on
memory management policies, including virtual memory. Protection
and sharing of information, including general models for implementation of various degrees of sharing. Resource allocation in general,
including deadlock detection and prevention strategies. Introduction to
operating system performance measurement, for both efficiency and
logical correctness. Two hours lecture and one hour laboratory. Prerequisite: CS 3281. [3]
CS 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly CS 240A] Open to
qualified majors with consent of instructor and adviser. No more than 6
hours may be counted towards the computer science major. Prerequisite: CS 2231. [1-3 each semester]

337
CS 3861. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly CS 240B] Open to
qualified majors with consent of instructor and adviser. No more than 6
hours may be counted towards the computer science major. Prerequisite: CS 2231. [1-3 each semester]
CS 3891. Special Topics. [Formerly CS 291] [V ariable credit: 1-3 each
semester]
CS 3892. Special Topics. [Formerly CS 292] Fulfills project course
requirement in CS major. [3]
CS 4260. Artificial Intelligence. [Formerly CS 260] Principles and programming techniques of artificial intelligence. Strategies for searching, representation of knowledge and automatic deduction, learning, and adaptive
systems. Survey of applications. Prerequisite: CS 3250, CS 3251. FALL. [3]
CS 4266. Topics in Big Data. Principles and practices of big data processing and analytics. Data storage databases and data modeling techniques, data processing and querying, data analytics and applications of
machine learning using these systems. Prerequisite: CS 3251. SPRING. [3]
CS 4269. Project in Artificial Intelligence. [Formerly CS 269] Students
work in small groups on the specification, design, implementation, and
testing of a sizeable AI software project. Projects (e.g., an "intelligent"
game player) require that students address a variety of AI subject areas,
notably heuristic search, uncertain reasoning, planning, knowledge
representation, and learning. Class discussion highlights student progress, elaborates topics under investigation, and identifies other relevant
topics (e.g., vision) that the project does not explore in depth. Prerequisite: CS 4260. SPRING. [3]
CS 4278. Principles of Software Engineering. [Formerly CS 278]
The nature of software. The object-oriented paradigm. Software lifecycle models. Requirements, specification, design, implementation,
documentation, and testing of software. Object-oriented analysis and
design. Software maintenance. Prerequisite: CS 3251. FALL. [3]
CS 4279. Software Engineering Project. [Formerly CS 279] Students
work in teams to specify, design, implement, document, and test a nontrivial software project. The use of CASE (Computer Assisted Software
Engineering) tools is stressed. Prerequisite: CS 4278. SPRING. [3]
CS 4283. Computer Networks. [Formerly CS 283] Computer communications. Network (Internet) architecture. Algorithms and protocol
design at each layer of the network stack. Cross-layer interactions and
performance analysis. Network simulation tools. Lab and programming
assignments. Credit given for only one of CS 4283 or EECE 4371. Prerequisite: CS 3281 or EECE 4376. [3]
CS 4284. Computer Systems Analysis. [Formerly CS 284] Techniques for evaluating computer system performance with emphasis
upon application. Topics include measurement and instrumentation
techniques, benchmarking, simulation techniques, elementary queuing
models, data analysis, operation analysis, performance criteria, case
studies. Project involving a real computer system. Prerequisite: CS
3281. [3]
CS 4285. Network Security. [Formerly CS 285] Principles and practice
of network security. Security threats and mechanisms. Cryptography,
key management, and message authentication. System security practices and recent research topics. Prerequisite: CS 4283. [3]
CS 4287. Principles of Cloud Computing. Fundamental concepts of
cloud computing, different service models, techniques for resource virtualization, programming models, management, mobile cloud computing,
recent advances, and hands-on experimentation. Prereq: CS 3281. [3]
CS 4288. Web-based System Architecture. Core concepts necessary
to architect, build, test, and deploy complex web-based systems; analysis of key domain requirements in security, robustness, performance,
and scalability. Prerequisite: CS 3251. FALL. [3]
CS 4959. Computer Science Project Seminar. [Formerly CS 297]
Elements of professional engineering practice, professional education and lifelong learning, intellectual property and software patents,
open source and crowd source software development, liability, soft risk
safety and security, privacy issues, interdisciplinary teams and team

E

338
tools, professional organization, careers, entrepreneurship, human
computer interaction. Prerequisite: CS 3251. FALL. [1]
CS 5250. Algorithms. (Also listed as CS 3250) Advanced data structures,
systematic study and analysis of important algorithms for searching; sorting; string processing; mathematical, geometrical, and graph algorithms,
classes of P and NP, NP-complete and intractable problems. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3250. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 5251. Intermediate Software Design. (Also listed as CS 3251)
High quality development and reuse of architectural patterns, design
patterns, and software components. Theoretical and practical aspects
of developing, documenting, testing, and applying reusable class libraries and object-oriented frameworks using object-oriented and component-based programming languages and tools. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 3251. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 5252. Theory of Automata, Formal Languages, and Computation. (Also listed as CS 3252) Finite-state machines and regular expressions. Context-free grammars and languages. Pushdown automata.
Turing machines. U ndecideability. The Chomsky hierarchy. Computational complexity. No credit for students who have earned credit for
3252. SPRING. [3]
CS 5258. Introduction to Computer Graphics. (Also listed as CS
3258) Featuring 2D rendering and image-based techniques, 2D and
3D transformations, modeling, 3D rendering, graphics pipeline, raytracing, and texture-mapping. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 3258. FALL. [3]
CS 5259. Project in Computer Animation Design and Technology.
(Also listed as CS 3259) Introduction to the principles and techniques
of computer animation. Students work in small groups on the design,
modeling, animation, and rendering of a small computer animation project. Topics include storyboarding, camera control, skeletons, inverse
kinematics, splines, keyframing, motion capture, dynamic simulation,
particle systems, facial animation, and motion perception. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3259. FALL. [3]
CS 5260. Artificial Intelligence. (Also listed as CS 4260) Introduction
to the principles and programming techniques of artificial intelligence.
Strategies for searching, representation of knowledge and automatic
deduction, learning, and adaptive systems. Survey of applications. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4260. FALL. [3]
CS 5265. Introduction to Database Management Systems. (Also
listed as CS 3265) Logical and physical organization of databases. Data
models and query languages, with emphasis on the relational model and
its semantics. Concepts of data independence, security, integrity, concurrency. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3265. [3]
CS 5266. Topics in Big Data. Principles and practices of big data
processing and analytics. Data storage databases and data modeling
techniques, data processing and querying, data analytics and applications of machine learning using these systems. SPRING. [3]
CS 5269. Project in Artificial Intelligence. (Also listed as CS 4269)
Students work in small groups on the specification, design, implementation, and testing of a sizeable AI software project. Projects (e.g., an
"intelligent" game player) require that students address a variety of AI
subject areas, notably heuristic search, uncertain reasoning, planning,
knowledge representation, and learning. Class discussion highlights student progress, elaborates topics under investigation, and identifies other
relevant topics (e.g., vision) that the project does not explore in depth. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4269. SPRING. [3]
CS 5270. Programming Languages. (Also listed as CS 3270) General
criteria for design, implementation, and evaluation of programming languages. Historical perspective. Syntactic and semantic specification,
compilations, and interpretation processes. Comparative studies of
data types and data control, procedures and parameters, sequence
control, nesting, scope and storage management, run-time representations. Problem solving using non-standard languages. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3270. FALL, SPRING. [3]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
CS 5274. Modeling and Simulation. (Also listed as CS 3274) General theory of modeling and simulation of a variety of systems: physical
processes, computer systems, biological systems, and manufacturing
processes. Principles of discrete-event, continuous, and hybrid system
modeling, simulation algorithms for the different modeling paradigms,
methodologies for constructing models of a number of realistic systems, and analysis of system behavior. Computational issues in modeling and analysis of systems. Stochastic simulations. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3274. [3]
CS 5276. Compiler Construction. (Also listed as CS 3276) Review of
programming language structures, translation, loading, execution, and
storage allocation. Compilation of simple expressions and statements.
Organization of a compiler including compile-time and run-time symbol
tables, lexical scan, syntax scan, object code generation, error diagnostics, object code optimization techniques, and overall design. U se
of a high-level language to write a complete compiler. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3276. [3]
CS 5278. Principles of Software Engineering. (Also listed as CS
4278) The nature of software. The object-oriented paradigm. Software
life-cycle models. Requirements, specification, design, implementation, documentation, and testing of software. Object-oriented analysis
and design. Software maintenance. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4278. FALL. [3]
CS 5279. Software Engineering Project. (Also listed as CS 4279)
Students work in teams to specify, design, implement, document, and
test a nontrivial software project. The use of CASE (Computer Assisted
Software Engineering) tools is stressed. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 4279. SPRING. [3]
CS 5281. Principles of Operating Systems I. (Also listed as CS
3281) Resource allocation and control functions of operating systems.
Scheduling of processes and processors. Concurrent processes and
primitives for their synchronization. U se of parallel processes in designing operating system subsystems. Methods of implementing parallel
processes on conventional computers. V irtual memory, paging, protection of shared and non-shared information. Structures of data files in
secondary storage. Security issues. Case studies. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3281. FALL, SPRING. [3]
CS 5282. Principles of Operating Systems II. (Also listed as CS 3282)
Projects involving modification of a current operating system. Lectures
on memory management policies, including virtual memory. Protection
and sharing of information, including general models for implementation of various degrees of sharing. Resource allocation in general,
including deadlock detection and prevention strategies. Introduction to
operating system performance measurement, for both efficiency and
logical correctness. Two hours lecture and one hour laboratory. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 3282. [3]
CS 5283. Computer Networks. (Also listed as CS 4283) Computer communications. Network (Internet) architecture. Algorithms and protocol
design at each layer of the network stack. Cross-layer interactions and
performance analysis. Network simulation tools. Lab and programming
assignments. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4283. [3]
CS 5284. Computer Systems Analysis. (Also listed as CS 4284) Techniques for evaluating computer system performance with emphasis
upon application. Topics include measurement and instrumentation
techniques, benchmarking, simulation techniques, elementary queuing
models, data analysis, operation analysis, performance criteria, case
studies. Project involving a real computer system. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4284. [3]
CS 5285. Network Security. (Also listed as CS 4285) Principles and
practice of network security. Security threats and mechanisms. Cryptography, key management, and message authentication. System
security practices and recent research topics. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 4285. [3]
CS 5287. Principles of Cloud Computing. (Also listed as CS 4287) Fundamental concepts of cloud computing, different service models, techniques for resource virtualization, programming models, management,

School of Engineering / Courses
mobile cloud computing, recent advances, and hands-on experimentation. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4287. [3]
CS 5288. Web-based System Architecture. (Also listed as CS 4288)
Core concepts necessary to architect, build, test, and deploy complex
web-based systems; analysis of key domain requirements in security,
robustness, performance, and scalability. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 4288. FALL. [3]
CS 5891. Special Topics. (Also listed as CS 3891) [V ariable credit: 1-3
each semester] No credit for students who have earned credit for 3891.
CS 5892. Special Topics. (Also listed as CS 3892) [V ariable credit: 1-3
each semester] No credit for students who have earned credit for 3892.
CS 6310. Design and Analysis of Algorithms. [Formerly CS 310] Set
manipulation techniques, divide-and-conquer methods, the greedy
method, dynamic programming, algorithms on graphs, backtracking,
branch-and-bound, lower bound theory, NP-hard and NP-complete
problems, approximation algorithms. Prerequisite: CS 3250. SPRING. [3]
CS 6311. Graph Algorithms. [Formerly CS 311] Algorithms for dealing
with special classes of graphs. Particular emphasis is given to subclasses
of perfect graphs and graphs that can be stored in a small amount of
space. Interval, chordal, permutation, comparability, and circular-arc
graphs; graph decomposition. Prerequisite: CS 6310 or MATH 4710. [3]
CS 6315. Automated Verification. [Formerly CS 315] Systems verification and validation, industrial case studies, propositional and predicate logic, syntax and semantics of computational tree and linear time
logics, binary decision diagrams, timed automata model and real-time
verification, hands on experience with model checking using the SMV ,
SPIN and U PPAAL tools, and state reduction techniques. [3]
CS 6320. Algorithms for Parallel Computing. [Formerly CS 320]
Design and analysis of parallel algorithms for sorting, searching,
matrix processing, FFT, optimization, and other problems. Existing
and proposed parallel architectures, including SIMD machines, MIMD
machines, and V LSI systolic arrays. Prerequisite: CS 6310. [3]
CS 6350. Artificial Neural Networks. [Formerly CS 350] Theory and
practice of parallel distributed processing methods using networks
of neuron-like computational devices. Neurobiological inspirations,
attractor networks, correlational and error-correction learning, regularization, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, Bayesian and
information theoretic approaches, hardware support, and engineering
applications. SPRING. [3]
CS 6351. Advanced Animation. [Formerly CS 351] Current research
issues and problems in computer animation, with special focus on
motion capture, dynamic simulation, and key-framing. Cloth, deformable bodies, natural phenomena, geometric algorithms, procedural techniques, facial animation, hair, autonomous characters, flocking, empirical
evaluation, and interfaces for animation. Prerequisite: CS 3259. FALL. [3]
CS 6352. Human-Computer Interaction. [Formerly CS 352] An overview of human computer interaction and problems of current interest.
Topics include: Human factors, GOMS, user interface design and evaluation, interaction modalities, distributed cognition, ubiquitous computing. A project involving design and evaluation will be performed. [3]
CS 6358. Computer Vision. [Formerly CS 358] The fundamentals of
computer vision and techniques for image understanding and high-level
image processing. Includes image segmentation, geometric structures,
relational structures, motion, matching, inference, and vision systems.
Prerequisite: EECE 6357. SPRING. [3]
CS 6359. Medical Image Registration. [Formerly CS 359] Foundations
of medical image registration. Mathematical methods and practical applications. Image-to-image registration, image-to-physical registration,
applications to image-guided procedures and the most commonly used
imaging modalities with an emphasis on tomographic images. FALL. [3]
CS 6360. Advanced Artificial Intelligence. [Formerly CS 360] Discussion of state-of-the-art and current research issues in heuristic search,
knowledge representation, deduction, and reasoning. Related application areas include: planning systems, qualitative reasoning, cognitive

339
models of human memory, user modeling in ICAI, reasoning with uncertainty, knowledge-based system design, and language comprehension.
Prerequisite: CS 4260 or equivalent. [3]
CS 6362. Machine Learning. [Formerly CS 362] An introduction to
machine learning principles of artificial intelligence, stressing learning's role in constraining search by augmenting and/or reorganizing
memory. Topics include connectionist systems; concept learning from
examples; operator, episode, and plan learning; problem-solving architectures that support learning; conceptual clustering; computer models
of scientific discovery; explanation-based learning; and analogical reasoning. Psychological as well as computational interests in learning are
encouraged. Prerequisite: CS 4260, CS 6360, or equivalent. SPRING. [3]
CS 6364. Intelligent Learning Environments. [Formerly CS 364]
Theories and concepts from computer science, artificial intelligence,
cognitive science, and education that facilitate designing, building,
and evaluating computer-based instructional systems. Development
and substantiation of the concept, architecture, and implementation of
intelligent learning environments. Multimedia and web-based technology in teaching, learning, collaboration, and assessment. Prerequisite:
CS 4260, CS 6360, or equivalent. [3]
CS 6366. Distributed Artificial Intelligence. [Formerly CS 366] Principles and practice of multiple agent systems for distributed artificial
intelligence. Game theory, distributed negotiation and decision making,
distributed problem solving, cooperation, coalition formation and distributed learning. Prerequisite: CS 4260. [3]
CS 6368. Computational Economics. Models and methods in computational economics, such as linear and non-linear optimization, decision theory, game theory, mechanism design, and computational tools. Applications in areas such as auctions, economics of security and privacy, market
design, and algorithmic trading. Prereq: CS 4260 or CS 5260. SPRING. [3]
CS 6375. Discrete-Event Systems: Supervisory Control and Diagnosis. [Formerly CS 375] Algebraic structures, automata and formal
language theory, process modeling with finite-state automata, supervisory control theory, controllability and supervision, supervisory control
under partial observation, modular and hierarchical supervisory control,
supervisory control of real-time systems, fault diagnosis of discreteevent systems, and modular diagnosis approaches. SPRING. [3]
CS 6376. Foundations of Hybrid and Embedded Systems. [Formerly CS 376] Modeling, analysis, and design of hybrid and embedded
systems. Heterogeneous modeling and design of embedded systems
using formal models of computation, modeling and simulation of hybrid
systems, properties of hybrid systems, analysis methods based on
abstractions, reachability, and verification of hybrid systems. FALL. [3]
CS 6377. Topics in Embedded Software and Systems. [Formerly CS
377] Specification and composition of domain-specific modeling languages. Design methodologies for embedded systems. Platforms for
embedded system design and implementation. Analysis of embedded
systems. SPRING. [3]
CS 6381. Distributed Systems Principles. [Formerly CS 381] Techniques
and mechanisms in distributed system design, such as logical clocks,
distributed consensus, distributed mutual exclusion, consistency models,
fault tolerance and paradigms of communication. Contemporary distributed system case studies and open challenges. Prerequisite: CS 3281. [3]
CS 6384. Performance Evaluation of Computer Systems. [Formerly
CS 384] Techniques for computer systems modeling and analysis.
Topics covered include analytical modeling with emphasis on queuing network models, efficient computational algorithms for exact and
approximate solutions, parameter estimation and prediction, validation techniques, workload characterization, performance optimization,
communication and distributed system modeling. Prerequisite: CS
3281 or CS 6381. SPRING. [3]
CS 6385. Advanced Software Engineering. [Formerly CS 385] An
intensive study of selected areas of software engineering. Topics may
include CASE tools, formal methods, generative techniques, aspectoriented programming, metrics, modeling, reuse, software architecture,
testing, and open-source software. Prerequisite: CS 4278. FALL. [3]

E

340
CS 6386. System-Level Fault Diagnosis. [Formerly CS 386] An overview of the basic concepts of the theory of fault diagnosis and problems of current interest. Topics include the classical PMC and BGM
models of fault diagnosis, hybrid (permanent and intermittent faults)
models, diagnostic measures for one-step, sequential, and inexact
diagnosis. Emphasis is on algorithmic techniques for solving the diagnosis and diagnosability problems in various models. Prerequisite: CS
6381. SPRING. [3]
CS 6387. Topics in Software Engineering. [Formerly CS 387] Topics
may include empirical software engineering and open-source software
engineering. Prerequisite: CS 4278 or consent of instructor. SPRING. [3]
CS 6388. Model-Integrated Computing. [Formerly CS 388] Problems
of designing, creating, and evolving information systems by providing
rich, domain-specific modeling environments including model analysis
and model-based program synthesis tools. Students are required to
give a class presentation and prepare a project. FALL. [3]
CS 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly CS 369] [0-6]
CS 8390. Individual Studies. [Formerly CS 390] [1-3]
CS 8395. Special Topics. [Formerly CS 395] [3]
CS 8396. Special Topics. [Formerly CS 396] [3]
CS 8991. Seminar. [Formerly CS 391] [1-3 each semester]
CS 8992. Seminar. [Formerly CS 392] [1-3 each semester]
CS 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly CS 379] Research prior
to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and for
special non-degree students. [0-12]
CS 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly CS 399]

Electrical Engineering
EECE 2112. Circuits I. [Formerly EECE 112] Development of basic
electrical circuit element models, signal representations, and methods
of circuit analysis. Matrix methods and computer techniques. Demonstrations of physical components, measurement techniques, and
transient phenomena. Corequisite: PHYS 1602; MATH 2300. FALL,
SPRING. [3]
EECE 2116. Digital Logic. [Formerly EECE 116] Numbering systems.
Boolean algebra and combinational logic, graphical simplification,
sequential logic, registers, and state machines. Corequisite: EECE
2116L. FALL, SPRING. [3]
EECE 2116L. Digital Logic Laboratory. [Formerly EECE 116L] Laboratory for EECE 2116. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite:
EECE 2116. FALL, SPRING. [1]
EECE 2213. Circuits II. [Formerly EECE 213] Steady-state and transient analysis of electrical networks with emphasis on Laplace transform methods and pole-zero concepts. Prerequisite: EECE 2112, PHYS
1602. Corequisite: EECE 2213L, MATH 2400. FALL, SPRING. [3]
EECE 2213L. Circuits II Laboratory. [Formerly EECE 213L] Laboratory
for EECE 2213. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: EECE
2213. FALL, SPRING. [1]
EECE 2218. Microcontrollers. [Formerly EECE 218] Microprocessor and
microcontroller architecture with emphasis on control applications. U sage
of assembly language and interfacing with programs written in high-level
languages. Interfacing and real-time I/O with 8-bit microprocessors, control algorithms, and networking with microcontrollers. Prerequisite: EECE
2116, CS 1101 or CS 1103. Corequisite: EECE 2218L. SPRING. [3]
EECE 2218L. Microcontrollers Laboratory. [Formerly EECE 218L]
Laboratory for EECE 2218. A small structured project is required. One
three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: EECE 2218. SPRING. [1]
EECE 3214. Signals and Systems. [Formerly EECE 214] Fundamental
signals, systems, and linear algebra concepts necessary for the study
of communications and control systems. Includes continuous-time
and discrete-time signal and system concepts, Fourier analysis in both

v anderbilt u niv ersity
continuous and discrete-time, Z-transform, and the FFT. Prerequisite:
EECE 2112. FALL, SPRING. [3]
EECE 3233. Electromagnetics. [Formerly EECE 233] Introduction to
electromagnetic field theory. Maxwell's equations are developed from
the historical approach. Electromagnetic waves are discussed with
regard to various media and boundary conditions. Prerequisite: PHYS
1602. Corequisite: MATH 2400. FALL. [3]
EECE 3235. Electronics I. [Formerly EECE 235] Introduction to semiconductor devices and electronic circuits. Diodes, BJT and MOS transistors. Device models, modes of operation, biasing. Small-signal models, low-frequency analysis of single- and multi-stage analog amplifiers,
simple amplifier design. Large signal models, dc analysis of digital circuits. Prerequisite: EECE 2112. Corequisite: EECE 3235L. FALL. [3]
EECE 3235L. Electronics I Laboratory. [Formerly EECE 235L] Laboratory for EECE 3235. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite:
EECE 3235. FALL. [1]
EECE 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly EECE 203] Supervised projects in electrical engineering, computer engineering, or
related fields. Consent of instructor required. No more than 6 hours
of EECE 3860 and 3861 may be applied toward graduation. [1-3 each
semester]
EECE 3861. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly EECE 204] Supervised projects in electrical engineering, computer engineering, or
related fields. Consent of instructor required. No more than 6 hours
of EECE 3860 and 3861 may be applied toward graduation. [1-3 each
semester]
EECE 3891. Special Topics. [Formerly EECE 291] [1-3 each semester]
EECE 3892. Special Topics. [Formerly EECE 292] [1-3 each semester]
EECE 4252. Signal Processing and Communications. [Formerly
EECE 252] AM and FM modulation. Also, advanced topics in signal
processing are treated. Prerequisite: EECE 3214. SPRING. [3]
EECE 4257. Control Systems I. [Formerly EECE 257] Introduction to
the theory and design of feedback control systems, steady-state and
transient analysis, stability considerations. Model representation. Statevariable models. Prerequisite: EECE 2213 or EECE 3214. FALL. [3]
EECE 4267. Power System Analysis. [Formerly EECE 267] Analysis of
large transmission and distribution networks. Analysis of power lines,
load flow, short circuit studies, economic operation, and stability are
introduced. Prerequisite: EECE 2213. [3]
EECE 4275. Microelectronic Systems. [Formerly EECE 275] Active
devices in the context of digital systems, with an emphasis on embedded systems integration. Characteristics and utilization of different
digital integrated circuit families, common bus structures and protocols
and real-world interfaces (comparators, A/D/A conversion). Prerequisite: EECE 2112, EECE 2116. SPRING. [3]
EECE 4283. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices.
[Formerly EECE 283] Physical principles of operation of the p-n junction, MOS field-effect transistor, and bipolar transistor. Fundamentals
of charge transport, charge storage, and generation-recombination;
application to the operation of MOSFET and BJT. Device modeling with
emphasis on features and constraints of integrated circuit technologies. Prerequisite: EECE 3235. [3]
EECE 4284. Integrated Circuit Technology and Fabrication. [Formerly EECE 284] Introduction to monolithic integrated circuit technology. U nderstanding of basic semiconductor properties and processes
that result in modern integrated circuit. Bipolar and MOSFET processes
and structures. Elements of fabrication, design, layout, and applications as regards semiconductor microelectronic technologies. Prerequisite: EECE 3235. SPRING. [3]
EECE 4286. Audio Engineering. [Formerly EECE 286] Engineering
aspects of high fidelity sound reproduction, with emphasis on digital
audio and loudspeakers. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion, data storage, perceptual coding, loudspeaker design. Prerequisite: EECE 2213, EECE 3235. [3]

School of Engineering / Courses
EECE 4287. Engineering Reliability. [Formerly EECE 287] Topics in
engineering reliability with emphasis on electrical devices and systems.
Reliability concepts and models. Risk analysis. Lifetime evaluation.
System examples. Prerequisite: EECE 3235 or EECE 4275. [3]
EECE 4288. Optoelectronics. [Formerly EECE 288] Fundamentals
and applications of light generation, propagation, and modulation in
passive and active optoelectronic components. Waveguides, lasers,
electro-optic modulators, and emerging optoelectronic technology for
optical communication, computing, and sensing applications. Prerequisite: EECE 3233 or equivalent. SPRING. [3]
EECE 4353. Image Processing. [Formerly EECE 253] The theory of
signals and systems is extended to two dimensions. Coverage includes
filtering, 2-D FFTs, edge detection, and image enhancement. Three lectures and one laboratory period. FALL. [4]
EECE 4354. Computer Vision. [Formerly EECE 254] V ision is presented as a computational problem. Coverage includes theories of
vision, inverse optics, image representation, and solutions to ill-posed
problems. Prerequisite: EECE 4353. [3]
EECE 4356. Digital Signal Processing. [Formerly EECE 256] Applications of Digital Signal Processing (DSP) chips to sampling, digital filtering, FFTs, etc. Three lectures and one laboratory period. Prerequisite:
EECE 3214. SPRING. [4]
EECE 4358. Control Systems II. [Formerly EECE 258] Modern control
design. Discrete-time analysis. Analysis and design of digital control
systems. Introduction to nonlinear systems and optimum control systems. Fuzzy control systems. Two lectures and one laboratory. Prerequisite: EECE 4257. SPRING. [3]
EECE 4371. Mobile and Wireless Networks. [Formerly EECE 261]
Design, development, and applications of mobile applications and services. Topics include wireless technologies, smart phone programming,
cloud computing services. Credit given for only one of EECE 4371 or CS
4283. Prerequisite: CS 2201 or equivalent programming experience. [3]
EECE 4376. Embedded Systems. [Formerly EECE 276] Advanced
course on the design and implementation of embedded computer-based
systems. Programming for real-time systems and the Internet of Things.
Embedded system modeling, design, analysis, and implementation using
real-time and event-driven techniques. A structured project is required.
Prerequisite: EECE 2218, CS 2201. Corequisite: EECE 4376L. FALL. [3]
EECE 4376L. Embedded Systems Laboratory. [Formerly EECE 276L]
Laboratory for EECE 4376. A team-oriented structured project is required.
One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: EECE 4376. FALL. [1]
EECE 4377. FPGA Design. [Formerly EECE 277] Design and applications of field-programmable gate arrays, Electronic Design Automation
(EDA) tools for design, placement, and routing. Hardware description
languages. Implementation of designs on prototype FPGA board. Prerequisite: EECE 2116. [3]
EECE 4380. Electronics II. [Formerly EECE 280] Integrated circuit analysis and design. High frequency operation of semiconductor devices.
Frequency-response and feedback analysis of BJT and MOS analog
amplifier circuits, multi-stage frequency-compensated amplifier design.
Transient analysis of BJT and MOS digital circuit families. Digital-toanalog and analog-to-digital conversion circuits. Prerequisite: EECE
3235. SPRING. [3]
EECE 4385. VLSI Design. [Formerly EECE 285] Integrated circuit and
fabrication techniques; CAD tools for design, layout, and verification;
parasitic elements and their effects on circuit performance; systemlevel design experience is gained by completing design and layout
phases of a project. Prerequisite: EECE 2116, EECE 3235. FALL. [3]
EECE 4950. Program and Project Management for EECE. [Formerly
EECE 295] Methods for planning programs and projects. Organization
structures and information management for project teams. Communications between project teams and clients, government agencies, and
others. Motivational factors and conflict resolution. Budget/schedule
control. Similar to ENGM 3700, but preparatory to the EECE senior
design project course, EECE 4951. Credit given for only one of ENGM

341
3700, CE 4400 or EECE 4950. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Corequisite: EECE 4959. FALL. [3]
EECE 4951. Electrical and Computer Engineering Design. [Formerly EECE 296] Based on product specifications typically supplied by
industrial sponsors, teams of students responsible for the formulation,
execution, qualification, and documentation of a culminating engineering design. The application of knowledge acquired from earlier course
work, both within and outside the major area, along with realistic technical, managerial, and budgetary constraints using standard systems
engineering methodologies and practices. Prerequisite: EECE 4950, at
least one DE course, senior standing. SPRING. [3]
EECE 4959. Senior Engineering Design Seminar. [Formerly EECE
297] Elements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism,
licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools,
codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Corequisite: EECE 4950. FALL. [1]
EECE 5218. Microcontrollers. (Also listed as EECE 2218) Microprocessor and microcontroller architecture with emphasis on control applications. U sage of assembly language and interfacing with programs
written in high-level languages. Interfacing and realtime I/O with 8-bit
microprocessors, control algorithms, and networking with microcontrollers. Graduate credit only for non-majors. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 2218. Corequisite: EECE 5218L. SPRING. [3]
EECE 5218L. Microcontrollers Laboratory. (Also listed as EECE
2218L) Laboratory for EECE 5218. A small structured project is
required. One three-hour laboratory per week. Graduate credit only for
non-majors. No credit for students who have earned credit for 2218L.
Corequisite: EECE 5218. SPRING. [1]
EECE 5233. Electromagnetics. (Also listed as EECE 3233) Introduction
to electromagnetic field theory. Maxwell's equations are developed from
the historical approach. Electromagnetic waves are discussed with regard
to various media and boundary conditions. Graduate credit only for nonmajors. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3233. FALL. [3]
EECE 5235. Electronics I. (Also listed as EECE 3235) Introduction to
semiconductor devices and electronic circuits. Diodes, BJT and MOS
transistors. Device models, modes of operation, biasing. Small-signal
models, lowfrequency analysis of single- and multi-stage analog amplifiers, simple amplifier design. Large signal models, dc analysis of digital
circuits. Graduate credit only for non-majors. Corequisite: EECE 5235L.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 3235. FALL. [3]
EECE 5235L. Electronics I Laboratory. (Also listed as EECE 3235L)
Laboratory for EECE 3235. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: EECE 5235. No credit for students who have earned credit for
3235L. FALL. [1]
EECE 5252. Signal Processing and Communications. (Also listed as
EECE 4252) AM and FM modulation. Also, advanced topics in signal
processing are treated. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 4252. SPRING. [3]
EECE 5257. Control Systems I. (Also listed as EECE 4257) Introduction to the theory and design of feedback control systems, steady-state
and transient analysis, stability considerations. Model representation.
State-variable models. No credit for students who have earned credit
for 4257. FALL. [3]
EECE 5267. Power System Analysis. (Also listed as EECE 4267) Analysis
of large transmission and distribution networks. Analysis of power lines,
load flow, short circuit studies, economic operation, and stability are introduced. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4267. [3]
EECE 5275. Microelectronic Systems. (Also listed as EECE 4275)
Active devices in the context of digital systems, with an emphasis on
embedded systems integration. Characteristics and utilization of different digital integrated circuit families, common bus structures and protocols and realworld interfaces (comparators, A/D/A conversion). No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4275. SPRING. [3]

E

342
EECE 5283. Principles and Models of Semiconductor Devices. (Also
listed as EECE 4283) Physical principles of operation of the p-n junction, MOS field-effect transistor, and bipolar transistor. Fundamentals
of charge transport, charge storage, and generation-recombination;
application to the operation of MOSFET and BJT. Device modeling with
emphasis on features and constraints of integrated circuit technologies. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4283. [3]
EECE 5284. Integrated Circuit Technology and Fabrication. (Also
listed as EECE 4284) Introduction to monolithic integrated circuit technology. U nderstanding of basic semiconductor properties and processes that result in modern integrated circuit. Bipolar and MOSFET
processes and structures. Elements of fabrication, design, layout, and
applications as regards semiconductor microelectronic technologies.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 4284. SPRING. [3]
EECE 5286. Audio Engineering. (Also listed as EECE 4286) Engineering aspects of high fidelity sound reproduction, with emphasis on
digital audio and loudspeakers. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog
conversion, data storage, perceptual coding, loudspeaker design. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4286. [3]
EECE 5287. Engineering Reliability. (Also listed as EECE 4287) Topics
in engineering reliability with emphasis on electrical devices and systems.
Reliability concepts and models. Risk analysis. Lifetime evaluation. System examples. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4287. [3]
EECE 5288. Optoelectronics. (Also listed as EECE 4288) Fundamentals and applications of light generation, propagation, and modulation
in passive and active optoelectronic components. Waveguides, lasers,
electro-optic modulators, and emerging optoelectronic technology for
optical communication, computing, and sensing applications. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 4288. SPRING. [3]
EECE 5353. Image Processing. (Also listed as EECE 4353) The theory of signals and systems is extended to two dimensions. Coverage
includes filtering, 2-D FFTs, edge detection, and image enhancement.
Three lectures and one laboratory period. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 4353. FALL. [4]
EECE 5354. Computer Vision. (Also listed as EECE 4354) V ision is
presented as a computational problem. Coverage includes theories of
vision, inverse optics, image representation, and solutions to ill-posed
problems. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4354. [3]
EECE 5356. Digital Signal Processing. (Also listed as EECE 4356)
Applications of Digital Signal Processing (DSP) chips to sampling, digital filtering, FFTs, etc. Three lectures and one laboratory period. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4356. SPRING. [4]
EECE 5358. Control Systems II. (Also listed as EECE 4358) Modern
control design. Discrete-time analysis. Analysis and design of digital
control systems. Introduction to nonlinear systems and optimum control systems. Fuzzy control systems. Two lectures and one laboratory.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 4358. SPRING. [3]
EECE 5371. Mobile and Wireless Networks. (Also listed as EECE
4371) Design, development, and applications of mobile applications
and services. Topics include wireless technologies, smart phone programming, cloud computing services. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4271. [3]
EECE 5376. Embedded Systems. (Also listed as EECE 4376) Advanced
course on the design and application of embedded microcontrollerbased systems. Programming for real-time systems and the Internet of
Things. Embedded system modeling, design, analysis, and implementation using real-time and event-driven techniques. A structured project
is required. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4376.
Corequisite: EECE 5376L. FALL. [3]
EECE 5376L. Embedded Systems Laboratory. (Also listed as EECE
4376L) Laboratory for EECE 5376. A team-oriented structured project is
required. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: EECE 5376.
No credit for students who have earned credit for 4376L. FALL. [1]
EECE 5377. FPGA Design. (Also listed as EECE 4377) Design and
applications of field-programmable gate arrays, Electronic Design

v anderbilt u niv ersity
Automation (EDA) tools for design, placement, and routing. Hardware
description languages. Implementation of designs on prototype FPGA
board. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4377. [3]
EECE 5380. Electronics II. (Also listed as EECE 4380) Integrated circuit analysis and design. High frequency operation of semiconductor
devices. Frequency-response and feedback analysis of BJT and MOS
analog amplifier circuits, multi-stage frequency-compensated amplifier design. Transient analysis of BJT and MOS digital circuit families.
Digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversion circuits. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3380. SPRING. [3]
EECE 5385. VLSI Design. (Also listed as EECE 4385) Integrated circuit
and fabrication techniques; CAD tools for design, layout, and verification;
parasitic elements and their effects on circuit performance; system-level
design experience is gained by completing design and layout phases of a
project. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4385. FALL. [3]
EECE 5891. Special Topics. (Also listed as EECE 3891) No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3891. [1-3 each semester]
EECE 5892. Special Topics. (Also listed as EECE 3892) No credit for
students who have earned credit for 3892. [1-3 each semester]
EECE 6301. Introduction to Solid-State Materials. [Formerly EECE
301] The properties of charged particles under the influence of an electric field, quantum mechanics, particle statistics, fundamental particle
transport, and band theory of solids will be studied. FALL. [3]
EECE 6302. Electric and Magnetic Properties of Solids. [Formerly
EECE 302] A review of electromagnetic theory of solids using advanced
mathematical and computational techniques. Dielectric, magnetic, and
optical properties. Fundamental interactions of electromagnetic radiation
and charged particles in solids. Prerequisite: EECE 6301. SPRING. [3]
EECE 6304. Radiation Effects and Reliability of Microelectronics.
[Formerly EECE 304] The space radiation environment and effects on
electronics, including basic mechanisms of radiation effects and testing issues. Total dose, single-event, high-dose-rate, and displacement
damage radiation effects. Effects of defects and impurities on MOS
long-term reliability. SPRING. [3]
EECE 6305. Topics in Applied Magnetics. [Formerly EECE 305]
Selected topics in magnetism, magnetic properties of crystalline and
non-crystalline materials; ferrite materials for electronics and microwave
applications, resonance phenomena. Prerequisite: EECE 6302. [3]
EECE 6306. Solid-State Effects and Devices I. [Formerly EECE 306]
The semiconductor equations are examined and utilized to explain
basic principles of operation of various state-of-the-art semiconductor
devices including bipolar and MOSFET devices. FALL. [3]
EECE 6307. Solid-State Effects and Devices II. [Formerly EECE 307]
The structure of solids, phonons, band theory, scattering phenomena,
and theory of insulators. [3]
EECE 6311. Systems Theory. [Formerly EECE 311] Analysis and
design of multivariable control systems using state space methods.
Stability, controllability, and observability treated. Controllers designed
using pole placement, optimal linear regulator, and the method of
decoupling. State reconstruction via observers. SPRING. [3]
EECE 6321. Cyber-Physical Systems. Modeling, design, and analysis
of cyber-physical systems that integrate computation and communication with physical systems. Modeling paradigms and models of computation, design techniques and implementation choices, model-based
analysis and verification. Project that covers the modeling, design, and
analysis of CPS. [3]
EECE 6341. Advanced Analog Electronics. [Formerly EECE 341]
Analysis and design of analog electronics circuits with emphasis on
integrated circuits. Topics include operational amplifiers, wideband
amplifiers, multipliers, and phase-locked loops. FALL. [3]
EECE 6342. Advanced Digital Electronics. [Formerly EECE 342]
Analysis and design of digital electronic circuits with emphasis on integrated circuits. Topics include logic families, semiconductor memories,
and the analog-digital interface. [3]

School of Engineering / Courses
EECE 6343. Digital Systems Architecture. [Formerly EECE 343]
Architectural descriptions of various CPU designs, storage systems,
IO systems, parallel and von Neumann processors and interconnection
networks. [3]
EECE 6354. Advanced Real-Time Systems. [Formerly EECE 354]
Fundamental problems in real-time systems, with focus on modeling, analysis, and design. Topics include: scheduling theory and techniques, time synchronization, time- and event-triggered systems, distributed architectures, advanced programming languages for real-time
systems. Literature reviews and projects. [3]
EECE 6356. Intelligent Systems and Robotics. [Formerly EECE 356]
Concepts of intelligent systems, AI robotics, and machine intelligence,
using research books and papers. Emphasis on how AI, brain research,
soft computing, and simulations are advancing robotics. Class projects. [3]
EECE 6357. Advanced Image Processing. [Formerly EECE 357]
Techniques of image processing. Topics include image formation, digitization, linear shift-invariant processing, feature detection, and motion.
Prerequisite: MATH 2300; programming experience. FALL. [3]
EECE 6358. Quantitative Medical Image Analysis. Image processing
and statistical methods for quantitative analysis and interpretation of
medical imaging data. Neuroimaging approaches related to brain structure, function, and connectivity. Massively univariate analysis (parametric mapping), multiple comparison issues, random fields, independent
components, non-parametric approaches, and Monte Carlo methods.
Students should have knowledge of undergraduate probability and
computer programming. [3]
EECE 6361. Random Processes. [Formerly EECE 361] An introduction
to the concepts of random variables, functions of random variables and
random processes. Study of the spectral properties of random processes and of the response of linear systems to random inputs. Introduction to linear mean square estimation. The emphasis is on engineering applications. FALL. [3]
EECE 6362. Detection and Estimation Theory. [Formerly EECE 362]
Fundamental aspects of signal detection and estimation. Formulation
of maximum likelihood, maximum aposteriori, and other criteria. Multidimensional probability theory, signal and noise problems, and Kalman
filter structure are studied. SPRING. [3]
EECE 7899. Master of Engineering Project. [Formerly EECE 389]
EECE 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly EECE 369] [0-6]
EECE 8395. Special Topics. [Formerly EECE 395] Based on research
and current developments in electrical engineering of special interest to
staff and students. [3]
EECE 8396. Special Topics. [Formerly EECE 396] Based on research
and current developments in electrical engineering of special interest to
staff and students. [3]
EECE 8850. Independent Study. [Formerly EECE 397] Readings and/
or projects on advanced topics in electrical engineering under the
supervision of the staff. Consent of instructor required. [V ariable credit:
1-3 each semester]
EECE 8991. Seminar. [Formerly EECE 392] [1]
EECE 8992. Advanced Seminar for Ph.D. Candidates. [Formerly
EECE 393] [1]
EECE 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly EECE 379] Research
prior to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and
for special non-degree students. [V ariable credit 0-12]
EECE 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly EECE 399]

Engineering Management
ENGM 2160. Engineering Economy. [Formerly ENGM 216] Economic
evaluation and comparison of alternatives: interest, periodic payments,
depreciation, criteria, and analytical procedures in investment decisionmaking, and cost-estimating. FALL, SPRING. [3]

343
ENGM 2210. Technology Strategy. [Formerly ENGM 221] Critical
issues faced by chief technology officers. Assessment of technological
capabilities and opportunities, formulation of a technical plan for the
product portfolio and commercialization, management of intellectual
property, and economic analysis. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing.
FALL, SPRING. [3]
ENGM 2440. Applied Behavioral Science. [Formerly ENGM 244]
Leadership styles, power team building, conflict resolution, management resolution, interviewing techniques. Prerequisite: sophomore
standing. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]
ENGM 3000. Enterprise System Design. [Formerly ENGM 272] Design of
complex enterprise systems and processes including enterprise requirements analysis, process-mapping, modeling, performance measurement,
benchmarking, solution development, and change management. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210 or BU S 2700, junior standing. FALL, SPRING. [3]
ENGM 3010. Systems Engineering. [Formerly ENGM 273] Fundamental considerations associated with the engineering of large-scale systems. Models and methods for systems engineering and problem solving using a systems engineering approach. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210,
junior standing. FALL, SPRING. [3]
ENGM 3100. Finance and Accounting for Engineers. [Formerly
ENGM 251] Time value of money, capital budgeting and formation,
financial accounting and reporting, double entry bookkeeping, taxation,
performance ratio measurements, and working capital management.
Probabilistic models for expected net present value and rate of return,
dividend pricing models for alternative growth scenarios, cost and market based models for average cost of capital, taxation algorithms, and
regression analysis for individual firm betas. Prerequisite: Junior standing. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]
ENGM 3200. Technology Marketing. [Formerly ENGM 242] Strategies
for marketing technology-based products and services. Demand analysis, segmentation, distribution, and personal selling. Economic analysis from inception to end use. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210 or BU S 2600,
junior standing. FALL. [3]
ENGM 3300. Technology Assessment and Forecasting. [Formerly
ENGM 275] Methods of forecasting technological advancements and
assessing their potential intended and unintended consequences. Delphi method, trend exploration, environmental monitoring, and scenario
development. Prerequisite: Junior standing. SPRING. [3]
ENGM 3350. Organizational Behavior. [Formerly ENGM 264] Study
of the factors that impact how individuals and groups interact and
behave within organizations, and how organizations respond to their
environment. Motivation theory, communication within organizations,
group dynamics, conflict management, decision making, power, strategic planning, organizational culture, and change. Focus on utilizing
analytical tools to understand organizations: symbolic, political, human
resources, and structural. Prerequisite: ENGM 2440. [3]
ENGM 3600. Technology-Based Entrepreneurship. [Formerly ENGM
253] Identification and evaluation of opportunities: risks faced by entrepreneurs, market assessment, capital requirements, venture capital
acquisition, legal structures, tax implications for sharing technologybased businesses. Prerequisite: Junior standing. FALL. [3]
ENGM 3650. Operations and Supply Chain Management. [Formerly
ENGM 254] Manufacturing strategy, process analysis, product and
process design, total quality management, capacity planning, inventory
control, supply chain design, and advanced operations topics. Modeling and analysis using cases and spreadsheets. Prerequisite: MATH
1301 or BU S 2700, junior standing. FALL. [3]
ENGM 3700. Program and Project Management. [Formerly ENGM
274] Scheduling, cost estimation/predictions, network analysis, optimization, resource/load leveling, risk/mitigation, quality/testing, international projects. Term project required. Provides validated preparation
for the Project Management Institute CAPM certification for undergraduates or the PMP for graduate students. Credit given for only one of
ENGM 3700, CE 4400, or EECE 4950. Prerequisite: MATH 1301 or BU S
2700, junior standing. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]

E

344
ENGM 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly ENGM 289] Readings or
projects on topics in engineering management under the supervision of
the ENGM faculty. Consent of instructor required. [1-3 each semester,
not to exceed a total of 3]
ENGM 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly ENGM 289] Readings or
projects on topics in engineering management under the supervision of
the ENGM faculty. Consent of instructor required. [1-3 each semester,
not to exceed a total of 3]
ENGM 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly ENGM 291] [V ariable credit 1-3
each semester]
ENGM 3891. Special Topics. [Formerly ENGM 292] [V ariable credit:
1-3 each semester]
ENGM 4500. Product Development. [Formerly ENGM 276] Projectbased course focused on the methods for managing the design, development, and commercialization of new products. Generating product
concepts, developing a prototype strategy, modeling financial returns,
securing intellectual property, designing retail packaging, and performing market testing to establish an optimal price. Teams include Engineering and MBA students. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210; ENGM 3700 or
CE 4400 or EECE 4950; junior standing. SPRING. [4]
ENGM 4800. Wealth Management for Engineers. Foundations of
financial planning; managing basic assets, credit, and insurance needs;
employee incentive plans such as stock options, deferred compensation and severance; managing investments in stocks, bonds, mutual
funds, and real estate; retirement and estate planning such as 401k,
403b, IRA, Roth, estate preservation. SPRING. [1]
ENGM 4951. Engineering Management Capstone Project. [Formerly
ENGM 296] Application of engineering management concepts through
team projects sponsored by faculty or seed-stage technology companies. Thinking, analysis, and planning processes needed to commercialize a concept and develop a business plan for presentation to
investors. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210; ENGM 3000 or 3010. Corequisite:
ENGM 3700. SPRING. [3]
ENGM 5000. Enterprise System Design. (Also listed as ENGM 3000)
Design of complex enterprise systems and processes including enterprise requirements analysis, process-mapping, modeling, performance
measurement, benchmarking, solution development, and change
management. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3000.
FALL, SPRING. [3]
ENGM 5010. Systems Engineering. (Also listed as ENGM 3010) Fundamental considerations associated with the engineering of large-scale
systems. Models and methods for systems engineering and problem
solving using a systems engineering approach. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 3010. FALL, SPRING. [3]
ENGM 5100. Finance and Accounting for Engineers. (Also listed as
ENGM 3100) Time value of money, capital budgeting and formation,
financial accounting and reporting, double entry bookkeeping, taxation,
performance ratio measurements, and working capital management.
Probabilistic models for expected net present value and rate of return,
dividend pricing models for alternative growth scenarios, cost and market based models for average cost of capital, taxation algorithms, and
regression analysis for individual firm betas. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 3100. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
ENGM 5600. Technology-Based Entrepreneurship. (Also listed as
ENGM 3600) Identification and evaluation of opportunities: risks faced
by entrepreneurs, market assessment, capital requirements, venture
capital acquisition, legal structures, tax implications for sharing technology-based businesses. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 3600. FALL. [3]
ENGM 5650. Operations and Supply Chain Management. (Also listed
as ENGM 3650) Manufacturing strategy, process analysis, product and
process design, total quality management, capacity planning, inventory
control, supply chain design, and advanced operations topics. Modeling and analysis using cases and spreadsheets. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 3650. FALL. [3]
ENGM 5700. Program and Project Management. (Also listed as
ENGM 3700) Scheduling, cost estimation/predictions, network analysis, optimization, resource/load leveling, risk/mitigation, quality/testing, international projects. Term project required. Provides validated
preparation for the Project Management Institute CAPM certification
for undergraduates or the PMP for graduate students. Credit given for
only one of ENGM 3700 or 5700, CE 4400 or 5400, or EECE 4950.
FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]
ENGM 6500. Engineering Leadership and Program Management.
Application of core principles of leadership and program management
for engineering professionals. Strategic planning, people management,
staffing, compensation, business process improvement theory, business interruption, leadership styles, emotional intelligence, negotiation,
ethical business practices. [3]

Engineering Science
ES 0703. Preparatory Academics. [Formerly ES 103] To prepare students to enter an undergraduate engineering or science program. The
content will vary from year to year and is usually offered in combination
with other academic courses, English as a second language, and various PAV E programs. No credit toward a V anderbilt degree. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. SU MMER. [0]
ES 1001. Engineering Commons Seminar. Topics vary. Open Elective
Credit only. [1]
ES 1115. Engineering Freshman Seminar. [Formerly ES 101] [1]
ES 1401. Introduction to Engineering, Module1. [Formerly ES 140A]
First of three required discipline-specific modules for Introduction to
Engineering credit providing an introduction to engineering analysis
and design. Discipline-specific modules selected based on individual
choice. Students choose three different disciplines for the three modules and all three must be completed in one semester for full course
credit. Emphasis is on contemporary engineering problem solving in a
discipline-specific context. FALL. [1]
ES 1402. Introduction to Engineering, Module 2. [Formerly ES 140B]
Continuation of ES 1401. ES 1401-1403 must be completed in one
semester for full course credit. FALL. [1]
ES 1403. Introduction to Engineering, Module 3. [Formerly ES 140C]
Continuation of ES 1402. ES 1401-1403 must be completed in one
semester for full course credit. FALL. [1]

ENGM 5200. Technology Marketing. (Also listed as ENGM 3200)
Strategies for marketing technology-based products and services.
Demand analysis, segmentation, distribution, and personal selling.
Economic analysis from inception to end use. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 3200. FALL. [3]

ES 2100W. Technical Communications. [Formerly ES 210W] Instruction and practice in written and oral communication. Emphasis is on
organization and presentation of information to a specific audience
for a specific purpose. Course includes writing and editing reports of
various lengths, preparing and using visual aids, and presenting oral
reports. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ENGM 5300. Technology Assessment and Forecasting. (Also listed
as ENGM 3300) Methods of forecasting technological advancements
and assessing their potential intended and unintended consequences.
Delphi method, trend exploration, environmental monitoring, and scenario development. No credit for students who have earned credit for
3300. SPRING. [3]

ES 2700. Engineering Career Development. A practical course designed
to help students succeed in the job/internship search and career development. Interviewing, networking, online tools, elevator pitch, career
fair strategies, career center resources, company research techniques,
resumes, cover letters, negotiating, follow-up messages. FALL. [1]

School of Engineering / Courses
ES 2900. Engineering and Public Policy. Role of federal policy in supporting and promoting engineering and science for the benefit of the
U .S. Ways engineering, science and public policy impact each other.
Federal government involvement, policy making, federal budget, role
of universities and national labs, national defense, homeland security,
biomedical enterprise. SPRING. [3]
ES 3230. Ships Engineering Systems. [Formerly ES 230] Ship characteristics and types, including design and control, propulsion, hydrodynamic forces, stability, compartmentation, and electrical and auxiliary
systems. Theory and design of steam, gas turbine, and nuclear propulsion. FALL. [3]
ES 3231. Navigation. [Formerly ES 231] Naval piloting procedures.
Charts, visual and electronic aids, and theory and operation of magnetic and gyro compasses; inland and international rules of the nautical
road. The celestial coordinate system, including spherical trigonometry
and application for navigation at sea. Environmental influences on naval
operations. SPRING. [3]
ES 3232. Ships Weapons Systems. [Formerly ES 232] Theory and
employment of weapons systems, including the processes of detection, evaluation, threat analysis, weapon selection, delivery, guidance,
and explosives. Fire control systems and major weapons types, including capabilities and limitations. Physical aspects of radar and underwater sound. Command, control, and communications and means of
weapons system integration. SPRING. [3]
ES 3233. Naval Operations. [Formerly ES 233] Methods of tracking
and intercepting at sea. Maritime maneuvering problems, formation
tactics, and shipboard operations. Naval communications, ship behavior and maneuvering, and applied aspects of ship handling. Prerequisite: ES 231. FALL. [3]
ES 3300. Energy and Sustainability—An Engineering Approach.
U ses basic understanding of mechanics, thermodynamics, and electrodynamics to describe primary and secondary energy generation
and use. Emphasis on current applications, energy efficiency at both
the source and demand sides, and future (near and long-term) energy
scenarios. V arious economic models are explored. Prerequisite: Junior
standing. [3]
ES 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly ES 248] Independent
study under the direction of a faculty member with expertise in the area
of study. [1-3 each semester, not to exceed a total of 3]
ES 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly ES 290] Technical elective courses
of special current interest. No more than six semester hours of these
courses may be credited to the student's record. Prerequisite: consent
of instructor. FALL, SPRING. [1-3]
ES 4951. Senior Capstone Experience. Based on project specifications typically supplied by industrial sponsors or part of a student’s
immersive experience. Students are responsible for the formulation,
execution, qualification, and documentation of a culminating capstone
experience. Application of knowledge acquired from earlier course
work, both within and outside the engineering core area, along with
realistic technical, managerial, and budgetary constraints using standard systems engineering methodologies and practices. Prerequisite:
Senior standing. Corequisite: ENGM 3700. SPRING. [3]
ES 4959. Senior Engineering Design Seminar. Elements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and
safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and
industrial design. Prerequisite: Senior standing. FALL. [1]

Overseas Study Programs
FNTE 0800. France—GA Tech Lorraine. [Formerly FNTE 250]
FNTE 0801. Germany—Dresden. [Formerly FNTE 252]
FNTE 0802. Mexico—Guadalajara. [Formerly FNTE 254]

345
FNTE 0803. China—Hong Kong CUHK. [Formerly FNTE 256]
FNTE 0804. Singapore—Natl. U. Singapore. [Formerly FNTE 258]
FNTE 0805. Hungary—Budapest BUTE. [Formerly FNTE 260]
FNTE 2056. Italy—Turin Pol diTorino. [Formerly FNTE 262]
FNTE 2057. China—Hong Kong HKUST. [Formerly FNTE 264]
FNTE 2058. Spain—Madrid Engineering (IES). [Formerly FNTE 266]
FNTE 2059. Israel—Tel Aviv Engineering (BU). [Formerly FNTE 268]
FNTE 2099. Graduate Study. [Formerly FNTE 299] Place marker
course for dual degree students.

Materials Science and Engineering
MSE 1500. Materials Science I. [Formerly MSE 150] Concepts of
materials science developed from an understanding of the atomic and
molecular structure of materials and their relationship to the properties of matter. Mechanical, electrical, physical, chemical, and magnetic
properties of metals, ceramics, organics, composites, and semiconductors are covered. Corequisite: MSE 1500L. SPRING. [3]
MSE 1500L. Materials Science Laboratory. [Formerly MSE 150L]
Laboratory for MSE 1500. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: MSE 1500. SPRING. [1]
MSE 2205. Strength and Structure of Engineering Materials. [Formerly MSE 232] A laboratory supplement to Mechanics of Materials, CE
2205. Students conduct experiments on the strength behavior of materials and simple engineering structures. Includes: tension and bending,
fasteners, photoelastic analysis of stress concentrators, strain gage
instrumentation to determine principal stresses, bending and deflection
curves for simple beams, loaded columns, and short struts. Corequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [1]
MSE 2500. Materials Science II. [Formerly MSE 250] A study of engineering materials that includes microstructure and property characterization, materials selection, failure analysis, modern processing methods, and an introduction to nanostructured materials. Case studies and
challenge based learning will be used to develop structure-processing
concepts for the practice of materials science and engineering. Prerequisite: MSE 1500. FALL. [3]
MSE 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly MSE 209C] Open to
select engineering students to do research under the guidance of a
faculty member. A formal written report is required. [1-3 each semester]
MSE 3889. Special Topics. [Formerly MSE 210A] Technical elective
courses of special current interest. No more than two semesters of this
course may be credited to the student's record. [V ariable credit: 1-3
each semester]
MSE 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly MSE 210B] Technical elective
courses of special current interest. No more than two semesters of this
course may be credited to the student's record. Prerequisite: consent
of instructor. [V ariable credit: 1-3 each semester] (Offered on demand)
MSE 6310. Atomic Arrangements in Solids. [Formerly MSE 310] A
basic understanding of the atomic arrangements observed in metals,
ceramics, semiconductors, glasses, and polymers. Lattice geometry
and crystal symmetry are discussed in detail and these concepts are
used to describe important crystal structures. Nanocrystalline materials
are also covered. An introduction to scattering theory and diffraction
phenomena provides insight into the analytical methods used by materials scientists for structural characterization. FALL. [3]
MSE 6343. Introduction to Electron Microscopy. [Formerly MSE 343]
Principles and applications of transmission electron microscopy in the
study of materials. Electron scattering, image contrast theory, operation of electron microscope, and specimen preparation. U se of the
electron microscope in experimental investigations. Two lectures and
one laboratory period. FALL. [3]

E

346
MSE 6391. Special Topics. [Formerly MSE 391] Based on faculty
research projects and highly specialized areas of concentration. FALL,
SPRING. [V ariable credit: 1-3 each semester]
MSE 6392. Special Topics. [Formerly MSE 392] Based on faculty
research projects and highly specialized areas of concentration. FALL,
SPRING. [V ariable credit: 1-3 each semester]
MSE 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly MSE 369] [0-6]
MSE 8991. Seminar. [Formerly MSE 397] A required noncredit course
for all graduate students in the program. Topics of special interest
consolidating the teachings of previous courses by considering topics
which do not fit simply into a single course category. FALL, SPRING.
[0] Staff.
MSE 8992. Seminar. [Formerly MSE 398] A required noncredit course
for all graduate students in the program. Topics of special interest
consolidating the teachings of previous courses by considering topics
which do not fit simply into a single course category. FALL, SPRING.
[0] Staff.
MSE 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly MSE 379] Research
prior to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and
for special non-degree students. [V ariable credit: 0-12]
MSE 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly MSE 399]

Mechanical Engineering
ME 1150. Automotive Components Seminar. [Formerly ME 150]
General automotive knowledge for engineering and design considerations. Basic component function, terminology and design. Suspension
(including suspension kinematics), steering (including steering geometry), driveline, transmission, engine and braking. Discussion and inclass participation. [1]
ME 1151. Laboratory in Machining. [Formerly ME 151] Introduction to
machining and fabrication of metals and plastics. Fabrication, design
and manufacturability of parts or components. [1]
ME 1152. Laboratory in Welding. [Formerly ME 152] Introduction to theory of welding processes and welding of metals. Design, fabrication, and
manufacturability of parts or components using welding processes. [1]
ME 1153. Computer Aided Design. [Formerly ME 153] Introduction to the
use of computers for solid modeling of machine parts and assemblies. [1]
ME 2160. Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Design. [Formerly
ME 160] Design fundamentals, computer-aided design, machine fabrication techniques, technical drawing, team-based learning, and a comprehensive design project. Two lectures and one lab. Prerequisite: ES
1401-1403 and Mechanical Engineering major. FALL. [3]
ME 2171. Instrumentation Laboratory. [Formerly ME 171] Techniques
associated with engineering measurements, curve fitting, presentation,
and analysis of data. Corequisite: MATH 2300. SPRING. [2]
ME 2190. Dynamics. [Formerly ME 190] The principles of dynamics
(kinematics and kinetics) of particles and rigid bodies. Mechanical
vibrations. Introduction to continuous media. Prerequisite: CE 2200,
PHYS 1601. Corequisite: MATH 2300. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]
ME 2220. Thermodynamics. [Formerly ME 220] Application of the first
and second laws to energy transformation processes and properties of
technologically important materials. Prerequisite: PHYS 1601, MATH
2300. FALL, SPRING, SU MMER. [3]
ME 3202. Machine Analysis and Design. [Formerly ME 202] Application of the principles of mechanics of materials to the analysis and
synthesis of machine elements. Corequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [3]
ME 3204. Mechatronics. [Formerly ME 204] Design of analog and digital electromechanical sensors and actuators, signal and power electronics, and application of digital microcontrollers to mechatronic systems. Prerequisite: EECE 2112; CS 1101 or 1103. SPRING. [3]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
ME 3224. Fluid Mechanics. [Formerly ME 224] Physical properties
of fluids, surface tension, viscosity; fluid statics and dynamics; control volume analysis of mass, momentum, and energy; dimensional
analysis, similitude, and modeling; viscous flows in pipes; drag and lift
on immersed bodies. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. Credit not
awarded for both ME 3224 and CE 3700. FALL. [3]
ME 3234. Systems Dynamics. [Formerly ME 234] Energy-based modeling of dynamic mechanical, electrical, thermal, and fluid systems to
formulate linear state equations, including system stability, time domain
response, and frequency domain techniques. Three lectures and one
three-hour laboratory. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. FALL. [4]
ME 3248. Heat Transfer. [Formerly ME 248] Steady-state and transient
heat transfer by conduction, forced and free convection and radiation,
including heat transfer by boiling and condensing vapors. Application
is made to practical design problems. Prerequisite: ME 2220, ME 3224.
SPRING. [3]
ME 3850. Independent Study. U nder the direction of a faculty member, students study in a focused area of mechanical engineering culminating in an engineering report of the activities and findings. [1-3]
ME 3860. Undergraduate Research. [Formerly ME 209A/B/C] U nder
the direction of a faculty member, students conduct a research project.
A formal, written report is required. [1-3]
ME 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly ME 210] Technical elective
courses of special current interest. No more than six semester hours
of this course may be credited to the student's record. FALL, SPRING,
SU MMER. [V ariable credit: 1-3 each semester] (Offered on demand)
ME 4213. Energetics Laboratory. [Formerly ME 213] Experimental
methods in heat transfer, fluid mechanics, and thermodynamics as
applied to energy conversion systems and their analyses. Prerequisite:
Senior standing. FALL. [2]
ME 4221. Intermediate Thermodynamics. [Formerly ME 221] Application of principles of thermodynamics to vapor and gas cycles, mixtures, combustion, and compressible flow. Prerequisite: ME 2220.
Corequisite: MATH 2420. [3]
ME 4226. Introduction to Gas Dynamics. [Formerly ME 226] An introduction to the study of compressible flow from subsonic to supersonic
flow regimes. Includes shock waves, expansion waves, shock tubes,
and supersonic airfoils. Prerequisite: ME 3224. [3]
ME 4236. Linear Control Theory. [Formerly ME 236] Classical and
modern approaches to the analysis and design of single-input/singleoutput (SISO) and multiple-input/multiple-output (MIMO) linear time
invariant control systems. Classical (frequency-domain) and modern
(state-space) approaches to SISO and MIMO control, including optimal
control methods. Credit is given for only one of ME 4236 or ME 5236.
Prerequisite: ME 3234. FALL. [3]
ME 4251. Modern Manufacturing Processes. [Formerly ME 251]
Introduction to manufacturing science and processes. A quantitative
approach dealing with metals, ceramics, polymers, composites, and
nanofabrication and microfabrication technologies. Prerequisite: ME
3202. Corequisite: ME 4950. [3]
ME 4258. Engineering Acoustics. [Formerly ME 258] The wave equation and its solutions; acoustic sources; reflection and transmission
of sound; propagation in pipes, cavities, and waveguides; noise standards and effects of noise on people; principles of noise and vibration
control; signal processing in acoustics; environmental noise measurement and control; and various contemporary examples. Prerequisite:
MATH 2400 or 2420. [3]
ME 4259. Engineering Vibrations. [Formerly ME 259] Theory of vibrating systems and application to problems related to mechanical design.
Topics include single degree of freedom systems subject to free,
forced, and transient vibrations; systems with several degrees of freedom, methods of vibration suppression and isolation, and critical speed
phenomena. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. [3]

School of Engineering / Courses
ME 4260. Energy Conversion. [Formerly ME 260] Energy resources,
use, and conservation are studied. The fundamentals of positive displacement machinery, turbo-machinery, and reactive mixture are introduced and used to examine various forms of power-producing systems. Prerequisite: ME 2220, ME 3224. [3]
ME 4261. Basic Airplane Aerodynamics. [Formerly ME 261] Study of
the atmosphere; analysis of incompressible and compressible flows,
shock waves, boundary layer and skin friction drag, lift and drag forces
over airfoils and wings, and flight performance; aircraft stability and
control, wing icing, and parachute-based recovery; history of flight and
aerodynamics. Corequisite: ME 3224. [3]
ME 4262. Environmental Control. [Formerly ME 262] A study of heating
and cooling systems, energy conservation techniques, use of solar energy
and heat pumps. Prerequisite: ME 2220. Corequisite: ME 3248. [3]
ME 4263. Computational Fluid Dynamics and Multiphysics Modeling. [Formerly ME 263] Computational modeling of viscous fluid flows
and thermal-fluid-structure interaction. Computational techniques
including finite-difference, finite-volume, and finite-element methods;
accuracy, convergence, and stability of numerical methods; turbulence
modeling; rotating machinery; multiphase flows; and multiphysics modeling. Prerequisite: ME 3224. SPRING. [3]
ME 4264. Internal Combustion Engines. [Formerly ME 264] A study
of the thermodynamics of spark ignition and compression ignition
engines; gas turbines and jet propulsion. Prerequisite: ME 2220. [3]
ME 4265. Direct Energy Conversion. [Formerly ME 265] The principles and devices involved in converting other forms of energy to electrical energy. Conversion devices: electro-mechanical, thermoelectric,
thermionic, fluid dynamic, and fuel cell. Prerequisite: ME 2220. [3]
ME 4267. Aerospace Propulsion. [Formerly ME 267] Application of
classical mechanics and thermodynamics to rocket and aircraft propulsion. Design and performance analysis of air-breathing and chemical
rocket engines. Advanced propulsion systems for interplanetary travel.
Contemporary issues in aerospace propulsion: space exploration,
renewable fuels. Prerequisite: ME 2220, ME 3224. [3]
ME 4271. Introduction to Robotics. [Formerly ME 271] History and
application of robots. Robot configurations including mobile robots.
Spatial descriptions and transformations of objects in three-dimensional space. Forward and inverse manipulator kinematics. Task and
trajectory planning, simulation and off-line programming. Prerequisite:
MATH 2410. [3]
ME 4275. Introduction to Finite Element Analysis. [Formerly ME 275]
Development and solution of finite element equations for solid mechanics and heat transfer problems. Introduction to commercial finite element
and pre- and post-processing software. Two lectures and one three-hour
laboratory each week. Prerequisite: CE 2205, MATH 2420. [3]
ME 4280. Advanced Dynamics of Mechanical Systems. [Formerly
ME 280] Development of methods for formulating differential equations
to model mechanical systems, including formalisms of Newton-Euler,
Lagrange, and virtual work methods to two- and three-dimensional
systems. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. [3]
ME 4284. Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic Systems. [Formerly ME 284] Incorporates bond graph techniques for energy-based
lumped-parameter systems. Includes modeling of electrical, mechanical, hydraulic, magnetic and thermal energy domains. Emphasis on
multi-domain interaction. Prerequisite: ME 3234. [3]
ME 4950. Design Synthesis. [Formerly ME 242] Development of the
design process: problem definition, design specifications, solution
identification, idea synthesis, modeling and simulation, and design
completion. Critical elements include problem selection, idea synthesis, and proposal writing. Individual design synthesis study projects
required. Prerequisite: ME 3202. FALL. [2]
ME 4951. Engineering Design Projects. [Formerly ME 243] Each student participates in a major group design project. Lectures will cover
case studies and topics of current interest in design. Prerequisite: ME
4950. SPRING. [3]

347
ME 4959. Senior Engineering Design Seminar. [Formerly ME 297]
Elements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools,
codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Corequisite: ME 4950. FALL. [1]
ME 5236. Linear Control Theory. [Formerly ME 336] (Also listed as
ME 4236) Classical and modern approaches to the analysis and design
of single-input/single-output (SISO) and multiple-input/multiple-output
(MIMO) linear time invariant control systems. Classical (frequencydomain) and modern (state-space) approaches to SISO and MIMO
control, including optimal control methods. Credit is given for only one
of ME 4236 or ME 5236. [3]
ME 5251. Modern Manufacturing Processes. (Also listed as ME
4251) Introduction to manufacturing science and processes. A quantitative approach dealing with metals, ceramics, polymers, composites,
and nanofabrication and microfabrication technologies. No credit for
students who have earned credit for 4251. [3]
ME 5258. Engineering Acoustics. (Also listed as 4258) The wave
equation and its solutions; acoustic sources; reflection and transmission of sound; propagation in pipes, cavities, and waveguides; noise
standards and effects of noise on people; principles of noise and vibration control; signal processing in acoustics; environmental noise measurement and control; and various contemporary examples. [3]
ME 5259. Engineering Vibrations. (Also listed as ME 4259) Theory of
vibrating systems and application to problems related to mechanical
design. Topics include single degree of freedom systems subject to free,
forced, and transient vibrations; systems with several degrees of freedom, methods of vibration suppression and isolation, and critical speed
phenomena. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4259. [3]
ME 5260. Energy Conversion. (Also listed as ME 4260) Energy
resources, use, and conservation are studied. The fundamentals of
positive displacement machinery, turbo-machinery, and reactive mixture are introduced and used to examine various forms of powerproducing systems. No credit for students who have earned credit for
4260. [3]
ME 5261. Basic Airplane Aerodynamics. (Also listed as ME 4261)
Study of the atmosphere; analysis of incompressible and compressible
flows, shock waves, boundary layer and skin friction drag, lift and drag
forces over airfoils and wings, and flight performance; aircraft stability
and control, wing icing, and parachute-based recovery; history of flight
and aerodynamics. Corequisite: ME 3224. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 4261. [3]
ME 5262. Environmental Control. (Also listed as ME 4262) A study of
heating and cooling systems, energy conservation techniques, use of
solar energy and heat pumps. No credit for students who have earned
credit for 4262. [3]
ME 5263. Computational Fluid Dynamics and Multiphysics Modeling.
(Also listed as ME 4263) Computational modeling of viscous fluid flows
and thermal-fluid-structure interaction. Computational techniques including finite-difference, finite-volume, and finite-element methods; accuracy,
convergence, and stability of numerical methods; turbulence modeling;
rotating machinery; multiphase flows; and multiphysics modeling. No
credit for students who have earned credit for 4263. SPRING. [3]
ME 5264. Internal Combustion Engines. (Also listed as ME 4264) A
study of the thermodynamics of spark ignition and compression ignition engines; gas turbines and jet propulsion. No credit for students
who have earned credit for 4264. [3]
ME 5265. Direct Energy Conversion. (Also listed as ME 4265) The
principles and devices involved in converting other forms of energy to
electrical energy. Conversion devices: electro-mechanical, thermoelectric, thermionic, fluid dynamic, and fuel cell. No credit for students who
have earned credit for 4265. [3]

E

348
ME 5267. Aerospace Propulsion. (Also listed as ME 4267) Application of
classical mechanics and thermodynamics to rocket and aircraft propulsion.
Design and performance analysis of air-breathing and chemical rocket
engines. Advanced propulsion systems for interplanetary travel. Contemporary issues in aerospace propulsion: space exploration, renewable fuels. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4267. [3]
ME 5271. Introduction to Robotics. (Also listed as ME 4271) History and application of robots. Robot configurations including mobile
robots. Spatial descriptions and transformations of objects in threedimensional space. Forward and inverse manipulator kinematics. Task
and trajectory planning, simulation and off-line programming. No credit
for students who have earned credit for 4271. [3]
ME 5275. Introduction to Finite Element Analysis. (Also listed as ME
4275) Development and solution of finite element equations for solid
mechanics and heat transfer problems. Introduction to commercial
finite element and pre- and post-processing software. Two lectures and
one three-hour laboratory each week. No credit for students who have
earned credit for 4275. [3]
ME 5280. Advanced Dynamics of Mechanical Systems. (Also listed as
ME 4280) Development of methods for formulating differential equations
to model mechanical systems, including formalisms of Newton-Euler,
Lagrange, and virtual work methods to two- and three-dimensional systems. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4280. [3]
ME 5284. Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic Systems. (Also listed as
ME 4284) Incorporates bond graph techniques for energybased lumpedparameter systems. Includes modeling of electrical, mechanical, hydraulic,
magnetic and thermal energy domains. Emphasis on multi-domain interaction. No credit for students who have earned credit for 4284. [3]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
ME 8348. Convection Heat Transfer. [Formerly ME 348] A wide range
of topics in free and forced convection is discussed. Solutions are carried out using analytical, integral, and numerical methods. Internal and
external flows are considered for both laminar and turbulent flow cases.
Convection in high speed flow is also studied. Prerequisite: ME 3248. [3]
ME 8351. Adaptive Control. [Formerly ME 351] Introduction to adaptive
control systems. Real-time parameter estimation methods. Self-tuning
regulators. Model reference adaptive control. Adaptive control for nonlinear systems. A research project is required. Prerequisite: ME 5236. [3]
ME 8352. Non-linear Control Theory. [Formerly ME 352] Introduction
to the concepts of nonlinear control theory. Topics include phase plane
analysis, nonlinear transformations, Lyapunov stability, and controllability/observability calculations. A multidimensional geometric approach
to these problems is emphasized. Prerequisite: MATH 2410. [3]
ME 8353. Design of Electromechanical Systems. [Formerly ME 353]
Analog electronic design for purposes of controlling electromechanical
systems, including electromechanical sensors and actuators, analog
electronic design of filters, state-space and classical controllers, and
transistor-based servoamplifiers and high voltage amplifiers. Significant laboratory component with design and fabrication circuits to control electromechanical systems. Implementation of digital controllers.
Prerequisite: ME 3234. [3]
ME 8359. Advanced Engineering Vibrations. [Formerly ME 359] The
development and application of Lagrange's equations to the theory of
vibrations. Nonlinear systems and variable spring characteristics are
analyzed by classical methods and by digital computer techniques.
Applications to the design of high speed machines are emphasized.
Prerequisite: ME 4259; MATH 3120, MATH 4110. [3]

ME 8320. Statistical Thermodynamics. [Formerly ME 320] Old and
modern quantum theory, including H atom, rigid rotor, and harmonic
oscillator. Atomic and molecular structure and spectra. MaxwellBoltzmann statistical model for ideal, chemically reacting, electron, or
photon gas. Introduction to Gibbs method. Prerequisite: ME 2220. [3]

ME 8363. Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer. [Formerly ME
363] A comparative study of available methods for solution of single
and multidimensional conduction heat transfer problems. Both steady
and transient problems are considered. Mathematical and numerical
methods are stressed. Radiant exchange between surfaces separated
by non-participating media is studied. Numerical methods are developed and discussed for non-isothermal surfaces and combined radiation and conduction problems are solved. Prerequisite: ME 3248. [3]

ME 8323. Introduction to Micro/NanoElectroMechanical Systems.
[Formerly ME 323] Fabrication techniques and mechanical behavior of
modern MEMS/NEMS structures. Application of NEMS/MEMS devices
to sensing and actuation. [3]

ME 8364. Nanophotonic Materials. Physics, design, modeling, and
applications of nanophotonic materials in modern optical systems.
Topics include waveguides and chip-based photonics, photonic crystals, plasmonics, and metamaterials. [3]

ME 8326. Gas Dynamics. [Formerly ME 326] Study of compressible
fluid flow from subsonic to supersonic regimes in confined regions and
past bodies of revolutions. Includes heat transfer, frictional effects, and
real gas behavior. Prerequisite: ME 3224. [3]

ME 8365. Micro/Nano Energy Transport. [Formerly ME 365] Theoretical examination of energy transport by electrons and phonons and
modeling of transport phenomena in crystalline solids at reduced length
scales. Particle transport models and solution methods for energy carriers in the context of semiconductor electronics, direct energy conversion devices and nanostructure. [3]

ME 7899. Master of Engineering Project. [Formerly ME 389]
ME 7999. Master's Thesis Research. [Formerly ME 369] [0-6]

ME 8327. Energy Conversion Systems. [Formerly ME 327] An
advanced study of energy conversion systems that include turbomachinery, positive displacement machinery, solar energy collection and
combustion, with consideration for optimizing the systems. [3]
ME 8331. Robot Manipulators. [Formerly ME 331] Dynamics and control of robot manipulators. Includes material on Jacobian matrix relating
velocities and static forces, linear and angular acceleration relationships,
manipulator dynamics, manipulator mechanism design, linear and nonlinear control, and force control manipulators. Prerequisite: ME 4271. [3]

ME 8366. Combustion. [Formerly ME 366] Introduction to combustion processes. Topics include combustion thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, premixed flame theory, diffusion flame theory, ignition and
detonation. Prerequisite: ME 4221, ME 3224. [3]
ME 8391. Special Topics. [Formerly ME 391] A course based on faculty research projects and highly specialized areas of concentration.
[V ariable credit: 1-3 each semester]

ME 8333. Topics in Stress Analysis. [Formerly ME 333] An investigation of thermal stress, transient stress, and temperatures in idealized
structures; consideration of plasticity at elevated temperatures; and
some aspects of vibratory stresses. [3]

ME 8393. Independent Study. [Formerly ME 393] Readings and/
or projects on advanced topics in mechanical engineering under the
supervision of the faculty. Consent of instructor required. [V ariable
credit: 1-3 each semester]

ME 8340. Wireless Mechatronics. [Formerly ME 340] Design of mechatronic devices with emphasis on miniaturization and wireless transmission of data. Programming of wireless microcontrollers with data acquisition and transmission from sensors and to actuators. Group design
project to simulate, fabricate, and test a miniaturized wireless robot. [3]

ME 8991. Seminar. [Formerly ME 397] [0]
ME 8999. Non-Candidate Research. [Formerly ME 379] Research
prior to entry into candidacy (completion of qualifying examination) and
for special non-degree students. [V ariable credit 0-12]
ME 9999. Ph.D. Dissertation Research. [Formerly ME 399]

School of Engineering / Courses

349

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
NANO 3000. Materials Characterization Techniques in Nanoscale
Engineering. [Formerly NANO 250] Principles and applications of
advanced materials characterization techniques used to characterize
specimens and engineered structures at the nano/microscale. Topics
include x-ray diffraction analysis, optical microscopy, electron microscopy, surface probe techniques, focused ion-beam instruments, Rutherford backscatter analysis and chemical microanalytical techniques,
treated both qualitatively and quantitatively. Lectures alternate with
laboratory on a weekly basis. Prerequisite: MATH 1301; CHEM 1602
or MSE 1500. FALL. [3]

Scientific Computing
SC 3250. Scientific Computing Toolbox. [Formerly SC 250] U se of
computational tools in multiple science and engineering domains. Simulations of complex physical, biological, social, and engineering systems, optimization and evaluation of simulation models, Monte Carlo
methods, scientific visualization, high performance computing, or data
mining. Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1103; MATH 1100 or higher. FALL. [3]
SC 3260. High Performance Computing. Introduction to concepts
and practice of high performance computing. Parallel computing, grid
computing, GPU computing, data communication, high performance
security issues, performance tuning on shared-memory-architectures.
Prerequisite: CS 2201 or 2204. SPRING. [3]
SC 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly SC 295A] Development of
a research project by the individual student under the direction of a
faculty sponsor. Project must combine scientific computing tools and
techniques with a substantive scientific or engineering problem. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and one Director of the SC minor is
required. Prerequisite: SC 3250. [1-3]
SC 3851. Independent Study. [Formerly SC 295B] Development of
a research project by the individual student under the direction of a
faculty sponsor. Project must combine scientific computing tools and
techniques with a substantive scientific or engineering problem. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and one Director of the SC minor is
required. Prerequisite: SC 3250. [1-3 each semester]
SC 3890. Special Topics. [Formerly SC 290] [1-3]
SC 5250. Scientific Computing Toolbox. (Also listed as SC 3250) U se
of computational tools in multiple science and engineering domains.
Simulations of complex physical, biological, social, and engineering
systems, optimization and evaluation of simulation models, Monte
Carlo methods, scientific visualization, high performance computing,
or data mining. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3250.
FALL. [3]
SC 5260. High Performance Computing. (Also listed as SC 3260)
Introduction to concepts and practice of high performance computing.
Parallel computing, grid computing, GPU computing, data communication, high performance security issues, performance tuning on sharedmemory-architectures. SPRING. [3]
SC 5890. Special Topics. (Also listed as SC 3890) No credit for students who have earned credit for 3890. [1-3]

E

350

v anderbilt u niv ersity

School of Engineering
PHILIPPE M. FAUCHET, Ph.D., Dean
K. ARTHUR OVERHOLSER, Ph.D., P.E., Senior Associate Dean
DAVID M. BASS, M.Ed., Associate Dean for Development and Alumni
Relations
PETER T. CUMMINGS, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Research
E. DUCO JANSEN, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Graduate Studies
CYNTHIA B. PASCHAL, Ph.D., Associate Dean
WILLIAM H. ROBINSON III, Ph.D., Associate Dean
JOHN R. VEILLETTE, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Preparatory Academics
HECTOR SILVA, M.B.A, Chief Business Officer
ROBIN L. CARLSON, Assistant to the Dean
BURGESS MITCHELL, M.Ed., Assistant Dean for Student Services
THOMAS J. WITHROW, Ph.D., Assistant Dean for Design
CHRISTOPHER J. ROWE, Ed.D., Director, Division of General
Engineering; Senior Aide to the Dean
ADAM W. MCKEEVER-BURGETT, M.Div., Associate Director of
Academic Services

Named and Distinguished Professorships
DOUGLAS E. ADAMS, Distinguished Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering; Daniel F. Flowers Chair
GAUTAM BISWAS, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair
JAMES A. CADZOW, Centennial Professor of Electrical Engineering,
Emeritus
THOMAS A. CRUSE, H. Fort Flowers Professor of Mechanical
Engineering, Emeritus
PETER T. CUMMINGS, John R. Hall Professor of Chemical Engineering
BENOIT M. DAWANT, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Engineering
DANIEL M. FLEETWOOD, Olin H. Landreth Professor of Engineering
KENNETH F. GALLOWAY, Distinguished Professor of Engineering
MICHAEL GOLDFARB, H. Fort Flowers Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
JOHN C. GORE, Chancellor’s University Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences and Biomedical Engineering
THOMAS R. HARRIS, Orrin Henry Ingram Distinguished Professor of
Engineering, Emeritus
GEORGE M. HORNBERGER, Distinguished University Professor; Craig
E. Philip Professor of Engineering
ROBERT W. HOUSE, Orrin Henry Ingram Distinguished Professor of
Engineering Management, Emeritus
MICHAEL R. KING, J. Lawrence Wilson Professor of Engineering
M. DOUGLAS LEVAN, J. Lawrence Wilson Professor of Engineering,
Emeritus
SANKARAN MAHADEVAN, John R. Murray Sr. Chair in Engineering
ANITA MAHADEVAN-JANSEN, Orrin H. Ingram Chair in Biomedical
Engineering
CLARE M. McCABE, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair
ARTHUR M. MELLOR, Centennial Professor of Mechanical Engineering,
Emeritus
SOKRATES T. PANTELIDES, University Distinguished Professor of
Physics and Engineering
FRANK L. PARKER, Distinguished Professor of Environmental and Water
Resources Engineering, Emeritus
PETER N. PINTAURO, H. Eugene McBrayer Professor of Chemical
Engineering
CYNTHIA A. REINHART-KING, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair
DOUGLAS C. SCHMIDT, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair
RONALD D. SCHRIMPF, Orrin Henry Ingram Professor of Engineering
RICHARD E. SPEECE, Centennial Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Emeritus
JANOS SZTIPANOVITS, E. Bronson Ingram Distinguished Professor of
Engineering

TAYLOR G. WANG, Centennial Professor of Materials Science
and Engineering, Emeritus; Centennial Professor of Mechanical
Engineering, Emeritus
SHARON M. WEISS, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair
JOHN P. WIKSWO, JR., Gordon A. Cain University Professor; A. B.
Learned Professor of Living State Physics

Department Chairs
MICHAEL R. KING, Biomedical Engineering
G. KANE JENNINGS, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
DOUGLAS E. ADAMS, Civil and Environmental Engineering
DANIEL M. FLEETWOOD, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
ROBERT W. PITZ, Mechanical Engineering

Standing Committees and Councils
ABET COMMITTEE. K. Arthur Overholser, Chair. Amanda R. Lowery,
Matthew Walker III, Michael I. Miga, Paul Laibinis, Florence Sanchez,
Julie L. Johnson, Kenneth D. Frampton, Christopher J. Rowe.
ADMINISTRATIVE. Philippe M. Fauchet, Chair. Douglas E. Adams,
Peter T. Cummings, Daniel M. Fleetwood, E. Duco Jansen, G. Kane
Jennings, Michael King, K. Arthur Overholser, Cynthia B. Paschal,
Robert W. Pitz, William Robinson, Christopher J. Rowe, Hector Silva.
ADMISSIONS AND SCHOLARSHIPS. Gautam Biswas, Chair. Bharat
L. Bhuva, Franz J. Baudenbacher, Paul E. Laibinis, Sankaran
Mahadevan, Nilanjan Sarkar. Ex Officio: K. Arthur Overholser.
CAREER COMMITTEE. Cynthia Paschal, Chair. Todd Giorgio, Peter
Pintauro, Douglas C. Schmidt, Ralph W. Bruce, Joel Barnett, David A.
Berezov, Robert E. Stammer.
CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE. Deyu Li, Chair. Mark D. Does, Matthew
Lang, David S. Kosson, Ronald D. Schrimpf. Ex Officio: Philippe M.
Fauchet.
CURRICULUM COMMITTEE. Paul E. Laibinis, Chair. Adam W. Anderson,
Florence Sanchez, Julie L. Johnson, Timothy Holman, Christopher J.
Rowe, D. Greg Walker. Ex Officio: K. Arthur Overholser.
DIRECTORS OF GRADUATE STUDIES/MASTER OF ENGINEERING. E.
Duco Jansen, Chair. Cynthia A. Reinhart-King, DGS in BME; Craig
L. Duvall, DGR in BME; Clare M. McCabe, DGS in CHBE; Jamey D.
Young, DGR in CHBE; Caglar Oskay, DGS in CE; Hiba Baroud DGR
in CE; Florence Sanchez, DGS in ENVE; Shihong Lin, DGR in ENVE;
Akos Ledeczi, DGS in CS; Robert A. Reed, DGS in EE; Deyu Li, DGS
in ME; Eva M. Harth, DGS in IMS.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP TASK FORCE. Douglas C. Schmidt, Chair.
Matthew Walker III, Scott A. Guelcher, James H. Clarke, Robert J.
Webster III, Yiorgos Kostoulas. Ex Officio: Philippe M. Fauchet.
FACULTY DEVELOPMENT AND DIVERSITY. Clare McCabe, Chair.
W. David Merryman, Mark D. Abkowitz, William Robinson, Robert J.
Webster III.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY. Peter T. Cummings, Chair. Brett Byram,
Ravindra Duddu, Bennett Landman, Akos Ledeczi, Haoxiang Luo,
Andy Richter, David R. Linn.
LIBRARY. Clare M. McCabe, Chair. Alan R. Bowers, Craig L. Duvall,
William A. Grissom, Jeremy P. Spinrad, Alvin M. Strauss.
REPRESENTATIVES TO THE FACULTY SENATE. Paul E. Laibinis,
Haoxiang Luo, W. David Merryman, Michael I. Miga, William
Robinson, Jason G. Valentine. Ex Officio: Philippe M. Fauchet.
REPRESENTATIVES TO THE GRADUATE FACULTY COUNCIL. Craig L.
Duvall, Cynthia A. Reinhart-King, Bridget R. Rogers, D. Greg Walker.
Ex Officio: Philippe M. Fauchet.
RESEARCH COUNCIL. Matthew J. Lang, Chair. Frederick R. Haselton,
Michael Goldfarb, David S. Kosson, Lloyd W. Massengill. Ex Officio:
Peter T. Cummings.

School of Engineering / Administration and Faculty
SAFETY. Deyu Li, Chair. David Koester, Frederick R. Haselton, Jamey D.
Young, Weng Poo Kang. Ex Officio: Philippe M. Fauchet.
SENIOR DESIGN COMMITTEE. Thomas J. Withrow, Chair. Matthew
Walker III, Russell F. Dunn, Scott A. Guelcher, Lori A. Troxel, Ralph W.
Bruce, Kenneth Pence. Ex Officio: Cynthia B. Paschal.
SHOP COMMITTEE. Matthew Walker III, Matthew J. Lang, Rich Teising,
Timothy Holman, Thomas J. Withrow, Robert J. Webster III.
SPACE COMMITTEE Hector Silva, Chair. Craig L. Duvall, David S.
Kosson, Gabor Karsai, Nabil Simaan. Ex Officio: Philippe M. Fauchet.

Faculty
MARK D. ABKOWITZ, Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering;
Professor of Engineering Management
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1974, 1976,
1980) [1987]
DOUGLAS E. ADAMS, Distinguished Professor of Civil and
Environmental Engineering; Daniel F. Flowers Chair; Professor of Civil
and Environmental Engineering; Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Chair of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (Cincinnati 1994); M.S. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1997); Ph.D. (Cincinnati 2000) [2013]
JULIE ADAMS, Adjoint Professor of Computer Science and Computer
Engineering
B.S., B.B.A. (Siena 1989, 1990); M.S.E., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1993,
1995) [2002]
NICHOLAS M. ADAMS, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Dixie State 2009); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2014) [2014]
MICHAEL L. ALLES, Associate Director of the Institute for Space and
Defense Electronics (ISDE); Research Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1987, 1990, 1993) [2003]
SHILO ANDERS, Research Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology;
Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Informatics; Research
Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.A. (Montana Western 2002); M.A. (Dayton 2004); Ph.D. (Ohio State
2008) [2011]
ADAM W. ANDERSON, Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.A. (Williams 1982); M.S., M.Phil., Ph.D. (Yale 1984, 1986, 1990) [2002]
AMRUTUR V. ANILKUMAR, Professor of the Practice of Mechanical
Engineering; Professor of the Practice of Aerospace Engineering
B.Tech. (Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 1982); M.S., Ph.D.
(California Institute of Technology 1983, 1988) [1988]
DANIEL ARENA, Senior Lecturer in Computer Science
B.A., M.S. (Rutgers 1986, 1990) [1999]
JOHN C. AYERS, Professor of Earth and Environmental Sciences;
Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (SUNY, Fredonia 1985); M.S. (Pennsylvania State 1988); Ph.D.
(Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 1991) [1991]
JUSTIN S. BABA, Adjoint Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (LeTourneau 1994); A.S. (Kilgore 1998); Ph.D. (Texas A & M
2003) [2016]
DANIEL ALLEN BALASUBRAMANIAN, Adjunct Assistant Professor
of Computer Science; Research Scientist/Engineer of Institute for
Software Integrated Systems
B.S. (Tennessee Technological 2004); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2008,
2011) [2011]
THEODORE BAPTY, Research Associate Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.S. (Pennsylvania 1985); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1991, 1995) [1995]
RIZIA BARDHAN, Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering
B.A., B.A. (Westminster College 2005, 2005); M.S., Ph.D. (Rice 2007,
2010) [2012]
ROBERT JOEL BARNETT, Associate Professor of the Practice of
Mechanical Engineering
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1970, 1978, 1993) [1993]

351
HIBA BAROUD, Assistant Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering; Director of Graduate Recruiting for Civil Engineering
Ph.D. (Oklahoma 2015) [2015]
J. ROBIN BARRICK, Adjunct Instructor in Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.E., M.B.A. (Vanderbilt 1974, 1983) [2008]
ERIC J. BARTH, Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (California, Berkeley 1994); M.S., Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of
Technology 1996, 2000) [2000]
PRODYOT K. BASU, Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (Lucknow [India] 1957); B.S. (Jadavpur [India] 1961); M.S.
(Calcutta [India] 1963); D.Sc. (Washington University 1977) [1984]
FRANZ J. BAUDENBACHER, Associate Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen [Germany] 1985); M.S.,
Ph.D. (Technische Universität München [Germany] 1990, 1994) [1997]
LEON M. BELLAN, Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (California Institute of Technology 2003); M.S., Ph.D. (Cornell
2007, 2008) [2013]
JAMES BENTLEY, Adjoint Professor of Materials Science and Engineering
B.S. (Salford [U.K.] 1970); M.S., Ph.D. (Birmingham [U.K.] 1971,
1974) [2001]
DAVID A. BEREZOV, Associate Professor of the Practice of Engineering
Management
B.S. (Syracuse 1975); M.B.A. (Vanderbilt 1980) [2000]
JOHN A. BERS, Adjoint Professor of Engineering Management
B.S. (Yale 1968); Ed.D. (Harvard 1975); M.B.A. (Chicago 1984); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 1998) [1996]
BRYAN R. BEYER, Adjunct Instructor in Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering
B.S. (Mississippi 1980) [2016]
BHARAT L. BHUVA, Professor of Electrical Engineering and Professor of
Computer Engineering
B.S. (Maharaja Sayajirao [India] 1982); M.S., Ph.D. (North Carolina
State 1984, 1987) [1987]
JULIE S. BIRDSONG, Adjunct Instructor in Engineering Management
B.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1978); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1991) [2012]
GAUTAM BISWAS, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of Computer
Science; Professor of Computer Engineering; Professor of
Engineering Management
B.Tech. (Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 1977); M.S., Ph.D.
(Michigan State 1980, 1983) [1988]
ROBERT E. BODENHEIMER, Associate Professor of Computer Science;
Associate Professor of Computer Engineering and Electrical Engineering
B.S., B.A., M.S. (Tennessee 1986, 1986, 1987); Ph.D. (California
Institute of Technology 1995) [2000]
ALFRED B. BONDS III, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus
and Professor of Computer Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of
Biomedical Engineering, Emeritus; Lecturer in Electrical Engineering
A.B. (Cornell 1968); M.S., Ph.D. (Northwestern 1972, 1974) [1980]
ALAN R. BOWERS, Associate Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.C.E., M.C.E., Ph.D. (Delaware 1976, 1978, 1982) [1982]
ARTHUR J. BRODERSEN, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Computer Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1961, 1963, 1966) [1974]
DANIEL B. BROWN, Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences;
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Dickinson 1989); M.D. (Hahnemann Medical 1993) [2013]
KEVIN G. BROWN, Research Associate Professor of Civil and
Environmental Engineering; Research Scientist/Engineer of Civil and
Environmental Engineering
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1985, 1987, 2008) [2007]
RALPH W. BRUCE, Professor of the Practice of Electrical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Santa Clara 1971, 1978); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1990) [2012]
AMANDA K. BUCK, Instructor in Biomedical Engineering; Instructor in
Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.S. (Mississippi State 1997); Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of Technology
2005) [2012]

E

352
ARNOLD BURGER, Adjoint Professor of Electrical Engineering; Adjunct
Professor of Physics
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Hebrew University of Jerusalem [Israel] 1976, 1981,
1986) [1992]
CURTIS D. BYERS, Professor of the Practice of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.E., M.S. (Vanderbilt 1976, 1979); Ph.D. (South Florida 1989) [2004]
BRETT C. BYRAM, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.E. (Vanderbilt 2004); Ph.D. (Duke 2011) [2013]
JAMES A. CADZOW, Centennial Professor of Electrical Engineering,
Emeritus; Professor of Computer Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., M.S. (SUNY, Buffalo 1958, 1963); Ph.D. (Cornell 1964) [1988]
JOSHUA D. CALDWELL, Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.A. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute 2000); Ph.D. (Florida 2004) [2017]
JANEY S. CAMP, Research Associate Professor of Civil and
Environmental Engineering
A.S. (Motlow State Community 1999); B.S., M.S. (Tennessee
Technological 2002, 2004); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2009) [2009]
ZHIPENG CAO, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.E. (Tsinghua [China] 2006); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 2012) [2013]
JOHN ANTHONY CAPRA, Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences;
Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.A. (Columbia 2004); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 2006, 2009) [2013]
GREGORY L. CASHION, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S., J.D. (Tennessee 1979, 1983) [2004]
CHARLES F. CASKEY, Assistant Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Texas 2004); Ph.D. (California, Davis 2008) [2013]
JAMES E. CASSAT, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics; Assistant
Professor of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology; Assistant
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., Ph.D., M.D. (Arkansas 2000, 2008, 2008) [2012]
EDUARD Y. CHEKMENEV, Associate Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences; Associate Professor of Physics; Associate
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Perm State [Russia] 1998); Ph.D. (Louisville 2003) [2009]
BO KYOUNG CHOI, Adjunct Associate Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.E. (Seoul National [Korea] 1990); M.E., Ph.D. (Pohang University of
Science and Technology [Korea] 1992, 1998) [2000]
ASHOK CHOUDHURY, Adjunct Professor of Materials Science and
Engineering; Senior Commercialization Associate, Technology Transfer
B.Tech. (Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 1979); M.S., Ph.D.
(Tennessee 1983, 1987) [2008]
KENNETH CHURCH, Adjunct Instructor in Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee 1972) [2017]
ANDRÉ L. CHURCHWELL, Senior Associate Dean for Diversity Affairs;
Levi Watkins Jr. M.D. Chair; Professor of Medicine; Professor of
Radiology and Radiological Sciences; Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Vanderbilt 1975); M.D. (Harvard 1979) [1991]
JOHN CALEB CLANTON, Adjoint Professor of Engineering Management
B.A. (Alabama, Huntsville 2001); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2005, 2005)
[2005]
CYNTHIA CLARK, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Middle Tennessee State 2003); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2012) [2014]
ANN N. CLARKE, Adjunct Professor of Environmental Engineering
B.S. (Drexel 1968); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1975); M.A. (Johns Hopkins
1980) [2002]
JAMES H. CLARKE, Professor of the Practice of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.A. (Rockford 1967); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 1973) [1980]
LOGAN W. CLEMENTS, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2001, 2004, 2009) [2013]
GEORGE E. COOK, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1960); M.S. (Tennessee 1961); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
1965) [1963]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
REBECCA S. MURAOKA COOK, Assistant Professor of Cancer Biology;
Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Vanderbilt 1993); Ph.D. (Cincinnati 1998) [2008]
ALLEN G. CROFF, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Michigan State 1971); B.S. (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 1974); M.B.A. (Tennessee 1981) [2012]
THOMAS A. CRUSE, H. Fort Flowers Professor of Mechanical
Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., M.S. (Stanford 1963, 1964); Ph.D. (University of Washington
1967) [1990]
PETER T. CUMMINGS, Associate Dean for Research; John R. Hall Chair
in Chemical Engineering; Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering
B.Math (Newcastle [Australia] 1976); Ph.D. (Melbourne [Australia]
1980) [2002]
BRUCE M. DAMON, Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Associate Professor of Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics; Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Massachusetts 1987); M.S., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1993,
2000) [2003]
JIMMY L. DAVIDSON, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Materials Science, Emeritus, Professor of Engineering
Management. Emeritus; Research Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.A. (Hendrix 1962); M.S., Ph.D. (Columbia 1965, 1967) [1989]
BENOIT DAWANT, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair in Engineering; Professor
of Electrical Engineering; Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Professor of Biomedical Engineering
M.S. (Université Catholique de Louvain [Belgium] 1982); Ph.D.
(Houston 1987) [1988]
KENNETH A. DEBELAK, Associate Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering, Emeritus
B.S. (Dayton 1969); M.S., Ph.D. (Kentucky, Lexington 1973, 1977) [1977]
PIERRE FRANCOIS DHAESE, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Catholic University of Leuven [Belgium] 2002, 2004,
2006) [2009]
ANDRE M. DIEDRICH, Research Professor of Medicine; Research
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
C.E. (Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg [Germany] 1979);
M.D. (I. M. Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy [Russia] 1985);
Ph.D. (Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin [Germany] 1991) [2000]
ZHAOHUA DING, Research Associate Professor of Electrical
Engineering; Research Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.E. (University of Electronic Science and Technology 1990); M.S.,
Ph.D. (Ohio State 1997, 1999) [2002]
JAMES P. DOBBINS IV, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (U.S. Merchant Marine Academy 1995); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
1997, 2001) [2001]
MARK D. DOES, Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Professor of Electrical
Engineering; Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Alberta [Canada] 1991, 1993, 1997) [2002]
EDWIN F. DONNELLY, Associate Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences; Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., M.D. (Cincinnati 1992, 1996); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2003) [2000]
RICHARD D. DORTCH, Assistant Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee, Chattanooga 2002); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006,
2009) [2012]
LAWRENCE W. DOWDY, Professor of Computer Science, Emeritus,
Professor of Computer Engineering, Emeritus
B.S. (Florida State 1974); A.M., Ph.D. (Duke 1976, 1977) [1981]
ABHISHEK DUBEY, Assistant Professor of Computer Science and of
Computer Engineering
B.Sc. (Banaras Hindu [India] 2001); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2005,
2009) [2009]
RAVINDRA DUDDU, Assistant Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.Tech. (Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 2003); M.S., Ph.D.
(Northwestern 2006, 2009) [2012]

School of Engineering / Administration and Faculty
RUSSELL F. DUNN, Professor of the Practice of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Auburn 1984, 1988, 1994) [2011]
CRAIG L. DUVALL, Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Director of Graduate Recruiting in Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Kentucky, Lexington 2001); Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of
Technology 2007) [2010]
WILLIAM A. EMFINGER, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
B.E., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2011, 2015) [2015]
DARIO J. ENGLOT, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Instructor in Clinical Neurological Surgery
B.S. (Scranton 2003); M.Phil., Ph.D., M.D. (Yale 2007, 2009, 2010) [2016]
DANIEL FABBRI, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Informatics; Assistant
Professor of Computer Science
B.S. (California, Los Angeles 2007); Ph.D. (Michigan 2013) [2014]
SHANNON L. FALEY, Research Assistant Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1999, 2002, 2007) [2014]
PHILIPPE M. FAUCHET, Dean of the School of Engineering; Professor of
Electrical Engineering
B.S. (Faculte Polytechnique de Mons [Belgium] 1978); M.S. (Brown
1980); Ph.D. (Stanford 1984) [2012]
LEONARD C. FELDMAN, Stevenson Professor of Physics, Emeritus;
Adjoint Professor of Materials Science and Engineering
B.A. (Drew 1961); M.S., Ph.D. (Rutgers 1963, 1967) [1995]
CHARLOTTE F. FISCHER, Professor of Computer Science, Emerita
B.A., M.A. (British Columbia [Canada] 1952, 1954); Ph.D. (Cambridge
[U.K.] 1957) [1980]
DOUGLAS H. FISHER, Associate Professor of Computer Science, and
Associate Professor of Computer Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (California, Irvine 1980, 1983, 1987) [1987]
WILLIAM H. FISSELL IV, Associate Professor of Medicine; Associate
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
S.B. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1992); M.D. (Case
Western Reserve 1998) [2012]
J. MICHAEL FITZPATRICK, Professor of Computer Science, Emeritus;
Professor of Computer Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of Electrical
Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of Neurological Surgery, Emeritus;
Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Emeritus;
Research Professor of Computer Science
B.S. (North Carolina 1967); Ph.D. (Florida State 1972); M.S. (North
Carolina 1982) [1982]
DANIEL M. FLEETWOOD, Olin H. Landreth Chair in Engineering;
Professor of Electrical Engineering; Chair of the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Purdue 1980, 1981, 1984) [1999]
KENNETH D. FRAMPTON, Associate Professor of the Practice of Mechanical
Engineering; Director of Undergraduate Studies in Mechanical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute 1989, 1991); Ph.D. (Duke
1996) [1998]
DANIEL J. FRANCE, Research Associate Professor of Anesthesiology;
Research Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., M.E. (Louisville 1990, 1991); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1997); M.P.H.
(Utah 2000) [2005]
WILLIAM R. FRENCH, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering
B.S. (Trinity [Texas] 2008); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2013) [2015]
DAVID JON FURBISH, Professor of Earth and Environmental Sciences;
Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (North Carolina 1978); M.S. (California State 1981); Ph.D.
(Colorado 1985) [2003]
KENNETH F. GALLOWAY, Distinguished Professor of Engineering
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1962); Ph.D. (South Carolina 1966) [1996]
KEVIN C. GALLOWAY, Director of Making; Research Assistant Professor
of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 2004, 2006, 2010) [2016]

353
ROBERT L. GALLOWAY, JR., Professor of Biomedical Engineering,
Emeritus; Professor of Neurological Surgery, Emeritus; Professor of
Surgery, Emeritus
B.S.E. (Duke 1977); M.E. (Virginia 1979); Ph.D. (Duke 1983) [1988]
YURUI GAO, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.E., M.E. (Southeast [China] 2005, 2008); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2013) [2013]
ANDREW C. GARRABRANTS, Research Associate Professor of
Environmental Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Rutgers, Camden 1994, 1998, 2001) [2000]
IVELIN S. GEORGIEV, Assistant Professor of Pathology, Microbiology
and Immunology; Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.S. (Eckerd 2004); Ph.D. (Duke 2009) [2015]
JONATHAN M. GILLIGAN, Associate Professor of Earth and Environmental
Sciences; Associate Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.A. (Swarthmore 1982); Ph.D. (Yale 1991) [1994]
TODD D. GIORGIO, Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Professor of
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; Professor of Cancer Biology
B.S. (Lehigh 1982); Ph.D. (Rice 1986) [1987]
ISURU S. GODAGE, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Moratuwa [Sri Lanka] 2007); Ph.D. (Genova [Italy] 2013) [2014]
ANIRUDDHA S. GOKHALE, Associate Professor of Computer Science
and Associate Professor of Computer Engineering
B.E. (Pune [India] 1989); M.S. (Arizona State 1992); D.Sc.
(Washington University 1998) [2002]
SANJIV GOKHALE, Professor of the Practice of Civil Engineering
B.S. (Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 1981); M.S. (Vanderbilt
1984); M.Phil., Ph.D. (Columbia 1990, 1991) [2001]
MICHAEL GOLDFARB, H. Fort Flowers Chair in Mechanical Engineering;
Professor of Mechanical Engineering; Professor of Electrical
Engineering; Professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
B.S. (Arizona 1988); M.S., Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 1992, 1994) [1994]
JOHN C. GORE, University Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Hertha Ramsey Cress Chair in Medicine; Professor of
Biomedical Engineering; Professor of Physics and Astronomy;
Professor of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics; Director, Institute
of Imaging Science
B.Sc. (Manchester [U.K.] 1972); Ph.D. (London [U.K.] 1976); B.A.
(Ealing College [U.K.] 1983) [2002]
WILLIAM A. GRISSOM, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Assistant Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences; Assistant
Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S.E., M.S.E., M.S.E., Ph.D. (Michigan 2004, 2006, 2007, 2008)
[2011]
SCOTT A. GUELCHER, Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering; Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute 1992); M.S. (Pittsburgh 1996);
Ph.D. (Carnegie Mellon 1999) [2005]
VALERIE GUENST, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1985, 1989, 1991) [2010]
MUKESH KUMAR GUPTA, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Rajasthan [India] 1999); M.S. (Mohan Lal Sukhadia [India] 2001);
Ph.D. (Pune [India] 2008) [2010]
BOUALEM HADJERIOUA, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Algiers [Algeria] 1984); M.S., Ph.D. (Arizona 1990, 1994); A.A.S.
(Roane State Community 2004) [2015]
GEORGE T. HAHN, Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Materials Science, Emeritus
B.E. (New York 1952); M.S. (Columbia 1955); Sc.D. (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology 1959) [1979]
CARL ALAN HALL, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Clemson 2010); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2016) [2016]
DENNIS G. HALL, Professor of Physics, Emeritus; Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.S. (Illinois, Champaign 1970); M.S. (Southern Illinois 1972); Ph.D.
(Tennessee 1976) [2000]

E

354
KEVIN HARKINS, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S.E. (Northern Arizona 2004); Ph.D. (Arizona 2009) [2016]
PAUL HARRAWOOD, Professor of Civil Engineering, Emeritus; Dean of
the School of Engineering, Emeritus
B.S. in C.E., M.S. in C.E. (Missouri, Rolla 1951, 1956); Ph.D. (North
Carolina State 1967) [1967]
PAUL A. HARRIS, Professor of Biomedical Informatics; Professor of
Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee Technological 1987); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1993,
1996) [1999]
THOMAS R. HARRIS, Orrin Henry Ingram Distinguished Professor of
Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Chemical Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of Medicine,
Emeritus
B.S., M.S. (Texas A & M 1958, 1962); Ph.D. (Tulane 1964); M.D.
(Vanderbilt 1974) [1964]
EVA M. HARTH, Associate Professor of Chemistry; Associate Professor
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; Director of Graduate
Studies in Interdisciplinary Materials Science
B.A. (Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität [Germany] 1990);
B.S., M.S. (Zurich [Switzerland] 1994, 1994); Ph.D. (JohannesGutenberg [Germany] 1998) [2004]
FREDERICK R. HASELTON, Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Professor
of Chemistry; Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences
B.A. (Haverford 1969); Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1981) [1989]
KELSEY BRIDGET HATZELL, Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
B.S., B.A. (Swarthmore 2009, 2009); M.S. (Pennsylvania State 2012);
Ph.D. (Drexel 2015) [2017]
GRAHAM S. HEMINGWAY, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Computer Science and of Computer Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1999, 2007, 2011) [2011]
S. DUKE HERRELL III, Professor of Urologic Surgery; Professor of
Biomedical Engineering; Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.A. (Richmond 1986); M.D. (Virginia 1990) [2001]
GIRISH SHANKER HIREMATH, Assistant Professor of Pediatrics;
Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
M.B.B.S. (Veer Surendra Sai Medical College [India] 1994); M.P.H.
(Johns Hopkins 2004) [2015]
ANTHONY B. HMELO, Research Associate Professor of Physics;
Research Associate Professor of Materials Science and Engineering
B.S., M.S., B.E., Ph.D. (Stony Brook 1982, 1982, 1982, 1987) [1988]
PETER G. HOADLEY, Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Emeritus
B.S. (Duke 1957); M.S., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1960, 1961) [1961]
WILLIAM H. HOFMEISTER, Adjoint Professor of Electrical Engineering;
Adjoint Professor of Physics
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1973, 1984, 1987) [1987]
WILLIAM TIMOTHY HOLMAN, Director of Undergraduate Studies in
Electrical and Computer Engineering; Research Associate Professor
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
B.S. (Tennessee 1986); M.S., Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of Technology
1988, 1994) [2000]
GEORGE M. HORNBERGER, University Distinguished Professor of
Civil and Environmental Engineering and Earth and Environmental
Science; Craig E. Philip Chair in Engineering; Professor of Earth and
Environmental Sciences; Director for VIEE
B.S., M.S.E. (Drexel 1965, 1967); Ph.D. (Stanford 1970) [2008]
ROBERT W. HOUSE, Orrin Henry Ingram Distinguished Professor
of Engineering Management, Emeritus; Professor of Electrical
Engineering, Emeritus B.S., M.S. (Ohio 1949, 1952); Ph.D.
(Pennsylvania State 1959) [1975]
SHAO-HUA HSU, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S. (National Chiao Tung [Taiwan] 2005); M.S. (National Central
[Taiwan] 2007); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2014) [2014]
ZHEN HU, Research Assistant Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Central South University of Technology [China] 2008); M.S.
(Huazhong University of Science and Technology [China] 2011); Ph.D.
(Missouri University of Science and Technology 2014) [2014]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
CHRISTOPHER R. IACOVELLA, Research Assistant Professor of
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
B.S. (Buffalo 2003); Ph.D. (Michigan 2009) [2009]
E. DUCO JANSEN, Associate Dean for Graduate Studies; Professor of
Biomedical Engineering; Professor of Neurological Surgery
M.S. (Utrecht [Netherlands] 1990); M.S., Ph.D. (Texas 1992, 1994) [1997]
ARTO A. JAVANAINEN, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering
M.S., Ph.D. (Jyvaskyla [Finland] 2002, 2012) [2015]
G. KANE JENNINGS, Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering; Chair of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
B.S. (Auburn 1993); M.S., Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 1996, 1998) [1998]
COURTNEY L. JOHNSON, Adjunct Instructor in Technical
Communications (General Engineering)
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1996); M.A. (Texas Tech University 1997) [2012]
JULIE L. JOHNSON, Associate Professor of the Practice of Computer
Science; Director of Undergraduate Studies in Computer Science
B.S. (Dickinson 1985); M.S. (Auburn, Montgomery 1997); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2003) [2003]
TAYLOR JOHNSON, Assistant Professor of Computer Engineering,
Computer Science, and Electrical Engineering
B.S. (Rice 2008); M.S., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 2010, 2013) [2016]
KAREN M. JOOS, Joseph N. and Barbara H. Ellis Family Chair in
Ophthalmology; Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences;
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., M.D., Ph.D. (Iowa 1982, 1987, 1990) [1994]
BENJAMIN T. JORDAN, Associate Professor of the Practice of
Engineering Management
B.A. (Mercer 1965); M.Div. (Yale 1968); Ph.D. (Emory 1974) [1988]
WENG POO KANG, Professor of Electrical Engineering and Professor of
Computer Engineering; Professor of Materials Science and Engineering
B.S. (Texas 1981); M.S., Ph.D. (Rutgers, Camden 1983, 1988) [1988]
GABOR KARSAI, Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, Professor of Computer Engineering; Associate Director of
the Institute for Software and Integrated Systems
B.S., M.S., Dr.Tech. (Technical University of Budapest [Hungary]
1982, 1984, 1988); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1988) [1988]
AMY V. KAUPPILA, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Computer
Engineering
B.S. (Auburn 2001); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2003, 2012) [2015]
JEFFREY S. KAUPPILA, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2001, 2003, 2015) [2003]
KAZUHIKO KAWAMURA, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Computer Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of Engineering
Management, Emeritus; Research Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.E. (Waseda [Japan] 1963); M.S. (California, Berkeley 1966); Ph.D.
(Michigan 1972) [1981]
DAVID V. KERNS, JR., Adjoint Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Florida State 1967, 1968, 1971) [1987]
PIRAN KIDAMBI, Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering
B.Tech. (National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli [India] 2006);
M.S. (ETH Zurich [Switzerland] 2010); Ph.D. (Cambridge [U.K.] 2014)
[2017]
MICHAEL R. KING, J. Lawrence Wilson Chair; Professor of Biomedical
Engineering; Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences; Chair
of the Department of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Rochester 1995); Ph.D. (Notre Dame 2000) [2017]
PAUL H. KING, Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Emeritus; Professor
Mechanical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., M.S. (Case Institute of Technology 1963, 1965); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 1968); P.E. ( 1973) [1968]
DONALD L. KINSER, Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Materials Science and Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., Ph.D. (Florida 1964, 1968) [1968]
STACY S. KLEIN-GARDNER, Adjoint Associate Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S.E. (Duke 1991); M.S. (Drexel 1993); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1996) [1999]

School of Engineering / Administration and Faculty
DAVID S. KOSSON, Cornelius Vanderbilt Professor of Engineering;
Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering; Professor of
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; Director of Consortium for
Risk Evaluation with Stakeholder Participation (CRESP)
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Rutgers 1983, 1984, 1986) [2000]
YIORGOS KOSTOULAS, Associate Professor of the Practice of
Engineering Management
B.Sc. (Aristotelion [Greece] 1989); M.A., Ph.D. (Rochester 1991,
1995); M.B.A. (Boston College 2001) [2013]
XENOFON D. KOUTSOUKOS, Professor of Computer Science, Professor
of Computer Engineering, Professor of Electrical Engineering
Diploma (National Technical University of Athens [Greece] 1993);
M.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Notre Dame 1998, 1998, 2000) [2002]
STEVEN L. KRAHN, Professor of the Practice of Nuclear Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Wisconsin, Milwaukee 1978); C.E. (Bettis Reactor Engineering
School 1980); M.S. (Virginia 1994); D.P.A. (Southern California 2001);
C.E. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2009) [2010]
MAITHILEE KUNDA, Assistant Professor of Computer Science and
Computer Engineering
B.S. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2006); Ph.D. (Georgia
Institute of Technology 2013) [2016]
ROBERT F. LABADIE, Professor of Otolaryngology; Professor of
Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Notre Dame 1988); Ph.D., M.D. (Pittsburgh 1995, 1996); M.Mgt.
(Vanderbilt 2013) [2005]
ROBERT LADDAGA, Research Professor of Computer Science
B.S., M.A. (South Carolina 1970, 1973); Ph.D. (Stanford 1982) [2013]
PAUL E. LAIBINIS, Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering;
Associate Chair of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; Director
of Undergraduate Studies in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
S.B., S.B. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1985, 1985); A.M.,
Ph.D. (Harvard 1987, 1991) [2005]
BENNETT A. LANDMAN, Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering,
Computer Engineering, and Computer Science; Associate Professor
of Biomedical Engineering; Associate Professor of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences; Associate Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences
B.S., M.Eng. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2001, 2002);
Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 2008) [2009]
MATTHEW J. LANG, Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering;
Associate Professor of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics
B.S. (Rochester 1992); Ph.D. (Chicago 1997) [2010]
ARON LASZKA, Research Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.Sc., M.Sc., Ph.D. (Budapest University of Technology and
Economics [Hungary] 2009, 2011, 2014) [2014]
RAY A. LATHROP, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1997); M.S. (Stanford 1999); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2014)
[2014]
ALICE LEACH, Research Assistant Professor of Materials Science and
Engineering
M.S. (Oxford [U.K.] 2012); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2017) [2017]
EUGENE LEBOEUF Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology 1985); M.S. (Northwestern
1986); M.S. (Stanford 1993); Ph.D. (Michigan 1997) [1997]
AKOS LEDECZI, Professor of Computer Engineering; Director of
Graduate Studies in Computer Science
Diploma (Technical University of Budapest [Hungary] 1989); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 1995) [1996]
M. DOUGLAS LEVAN, J. Lawrence Wilson Professor of Engineering,
Emeritus; Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
Emeritus
B.S. (Virginia 1971); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1976) [1997]
JUDY T. LEWIS, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Auburn 1985); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1989, 1992) [2000]
DEYU LI, Professor of Mechanical Engineering; Director of Graduate
Studies in Mechanical Engineering
B.E. (University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 1992);
M.E. (Tsinghua [China] 1997); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2002) [2004]

355
BARRY D. LICHTER, Professor Mechanical Engineering and Professor of
Materials Science and Engineering and Professor of Management of
Technology, Emeritus [1968]
SHIHONG LIN, Assistant Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering;
Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; Director
of Graduate Recruiting for Environmental Engineering
B.Sc. (Harbin Institute of Technology [China] 2006); M.Sc., Ph.D.
(Duke 2011, 2012) [2015]
ETHAN S. LIPPMANN, Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering; Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Illinois, Champaign 2006); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2012) [2015]
ROBERT L. LOTT, JR., Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S.M.E. (Southern Methodist 1960); M.S.M.E. (Arkansas 1962);
Ph.D. (Oklahoma State 1969) [1964]
AMANDA R. LOWERY, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee, Martin 2002); Ph.D. (Rice 2007) [2007]
HAOXIANG LUO, Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Otolaryngology
B.S., M.S. (Tsinghua [China] 1996, 1999); Ph.D. (California, San Diego
2004) [2007]
ILWOO LYU, Research Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.S., M.S. (Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2009, 2011); Ph.D. (North Carolina 2017) [2017]
ROBERT H. MAGRUDER III, Adjunct Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.A., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1973, 1980, 1984) [1985]
SANKARAN MAHADEVAN, John R. Murray Sr. Chair in Engineering;
Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering; Professor of
Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 1982); M.S. (Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute 1985); Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of Technology
1988) [1988]
ANITA MAHADEVAN-JANSEN, Orrin H. Ingram Chair in Biomedical
Engineering; Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Professor
of Neurological Surgery; Director of Undergraduate Studies in
Biomedical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Bombay [India] 1988, 1990); M.S., Ph.D. (Texas 1993,
1996) [1997]
ARTHUR W. MAHONEY, Research Assistant Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
B.S., B.S. (Utah State 2009, 2009); Ph.D. (Utah 2014) [2014]
BRADLEY ADAM MALIN, Professor of Biomedical Informatics; Professor
of Computer Science; Associate Professor of Biostatistics
B.S., M.S., M.Phil., Ph.D. (Carnegie Mellon 2000, 2002, 2003, 2006)
[2006]
H. CHARLES MANNING, Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Professor of
Neurological Surgery; Ingram Associate Professor of Cancer
Research; Associate Professor of Chemistry
B.Sc. (Tarleton State 2000); Ph.D. (Texas Tech University 2004)
[2008]
CHRISTINA C. MARASCO, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Biomedical Engineering
B.S.E. (Valparaiso 2004); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007, 2012) [2012]
DMITRY A. MARKOV, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Belarusian State [Russia] 1995); M.S., Ph.D. (Texas Tech
University 1998, 2004) [2005]
MIKLOS MAROTI, Visiting Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
M.S. (Szeged [Hungary] 1996); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1999, 2002)
[2002]
LLOYD W. MASSENGILL, Professor of Electrical Engineering and
Professor of Computer Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (North Carolina State 1982, 1984, 1987) [1987]
CLARE M. MCCABE, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of Chemical
and Biomolecular Engineering; Professor of Chemistry; Associate
Dean for the Office of Postdoctoral Affairs; Director, Graduate Studies,
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
B.S., Ph.D. (Sheffield [U.K.] 1995, 1998) [2004]

E

356
LISA J. MCCAWLEY, Research Associate Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.A. (Pennsylvania 1992); Ph.D. (Northwestern 1998) [2003]
VIC L. MCCONNELL, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Auburn, Montgomery 1990); M.S. (Alabama, Birmingham 1996);
M.S., J.D. (Samford 1998, 1998) [2005]
ARTHUR M. MELLOR, Centennial Professor of Mechanical Engineering,
Emeritus
B.S.E., M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1963, 1965, 1968) [1988]
MARCUS H. MENDENHALL, Adjoint Professor of Electrical Engineering
A.B. (Washington University 1979); M.S., Ph.D. (California Institute of
Technology 1981, 1983) [1984]
WILLIAM DAVID MERRYMAN, Associate Professor of Biomedical
Engineering; Associate Professor of Medicine; Associate Professor of
Pediatrics; Associate Professor of Pharmacology; Associate Chair of
Biomedical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Tennessee 2001, 2002); Ph.D. (Pittsburgh 2007) [2009]
MICHAEL I. MIGA, Harvie Branscomb Chair; Professor of Biomedical
Engineering; Professor of Neurological Surgery; Professor of
Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.S., M.S. (Rhode Island 1992, 1994); Ph.D. (Dartmouth 1998) [2000]
JASON E. MITCHELL, Research Assistant Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee Technological 1999); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2002,
2014) [2006]
VICTORIA L. MORGAN, Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.S. (Wright State 1990); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1994, 1996) [1999]
RICHARD MU, Adjoint Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Northeast Normal [China] 1982); M.S., Ph.D. (Southern Illinois
1987, 1992) [1998]
AHAD S. NASAB, Adjunct Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.Sc. (California State, Northridge 1980); M.S., Ph.D. (Georgia
Institute of Technology 1981, 1987) [2008]
SANDEEP K. NEEMA, Research Associate Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.Tech. (Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 1995); M.S. (Utah
State 1997); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2001) [1997]
GREGOR NEUERT, Assistant Professor of Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics; Assistant Professor of Pharmacology; Assistant Professor
of Biomedical Engineering
M.Eng. (Ilmenau University of Technology 2001); Ph.D. (LudwigMaximilians-Universität [Germany] 2005) [2012]
JUDSON NEWBERN, Adjunct Instructor in Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.A. (North Carolina State 1975); M.A. (Harvard 1978) [2008]
JACK H. NOBLE, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science; Research Assistant Professor of Hearing and
Speech Sciences
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007, 2008, 2011) [2011]
STEVEN NORDSTROM, Adjunct Associate Professor of Computer
Engineering
B.S.E.E. (Tennessee Technological 2001); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
2003, 2008) [2017]
MICHAEL NYE, Adjunct Professor of Environmental Engineering
B.A. (Colorado State 2000); M.Sc. (Trinity, Dublin [Ireland] 2001);
Ph.D. (Cambridge [U.K.] 2005) [2016]
JEFFRY S. NYMAN, Associate Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Rehabilitation; Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Memphis 1996, 1998); Ph.D. (California, Davis 2003) [2006]
KEITH L. OBSTEIN, Associate Professor of Medicine; Associate
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Johns Hopkins 2000); M.D. (Northwestern 2004); M.P.H.
(Harvard 2010) [2010]
REED A. OMARY, Carol D. and Henry P. Pendergrass Chair in Radiology
and Radiological Sciences; Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Chair of the
Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.S., M.D. (Northwestern 1989, 1991); M.S. (Virginia 1994) [2012]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
CAGLAR OSKAY, Associate Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering; Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering; Director
of Graduate Studies in Civil Engineering
B.S. (Middle East Technical [Turkey] 1998); M.S., M.S., Ph.D.
(Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 2000, 2001, 2003) [2006]
KNOWLES A. OVERHOLSER, Senior Associate Dean of the School
of Engineering; Professor of Biomedical Engineering; Professor of
Chemical Engineering
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1965); M.S., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1966, 1969) [1971]
DAVID A. OWENS, Professor of the Practice of Management and
Innovation; Professor of the Practice of Engineering Management;
Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological Sciences
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Stanford 1987, 1993, 1998) [1998]
SOKRATES T. PANTELIDES, University Distinguished Professor of
Physics and Engineering; William A. and Nancy F. McMinn Professor
of Physics; Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S. (Northern Illinois 1969); M.S., Ph.D. (Illinois, Champaign 1970,
1973) [1994]
ARON PAREKH, Assistant Professor of Otolaryngology; Assistant Professor
of Cancer Biology; Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania State 1996, 2004) [2010]
FRANK L. PARKER, Distinguished Professor of Environmental and
Water Resources Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Emeritus
S.B. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1948); M.S., Ph.D.
(Harvard 1950, 1955) [1967]
CYNTHIA B. PASCHAL, Associate Dean; Associate Professor of
Biomedical Engineering; Associate Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences
S.M., S.B. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1986, 1986); Ph.D.
(Case Western Reserve 1992) [1992]
KENNETH R. PENCE, Professor of the Practice of Engineering
Management
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1977, 2003, 2005) [2004]
RICHARD ALAN PETERS II, Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
A.B. (Oberlin 1979); M.S., Ph.D. (Arizona 1985, 1988) [1988]
WELLINGTON PHAM, Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., Ph.D. (Toledo 1996, 2000) [2006]
CRAIG E. PHILIP, Research Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S.E. (Princeton 1975); M.S., Ph.D. (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 1980, 1980) [2015]
CARY L. PINT, Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Northern Iowa 2005); M.S., Ph.D. (Rice 2009, 2010) [2012]
PETER N. PINTAURO, H. Eugene McBrayer Chair in Chemical
Engineering; Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Pennsylvania 1973, 1975); Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles
1980) [2008]
DOMINIQUE PIOT, Lecturer in Computer Science
M.Eng. (Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon [France]
1974); Master (Université de Lyon [France] 1977) [2016]
ROBERT W. PITZ, Professor of Mechanical Engineering; Chair of the
Department of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Purdue 1973); M.S., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1975, 1981) [1986]
JOSEPH E. PORTER, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Computer Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Kentucky, Lexington 1997, 2005); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2011)
[2011]
TRACIE PRATER, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Eastern Kentucky 2006); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2008, 2012)
[2014]
PADMA RAGHAVAN, Vice Provost for Research; Professor of Computer
Science and Professor of Computer Engineering
M.S., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania State 1987, 1991) [2016]
SUPIL RAINA, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S. (Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 2001); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
2011) [2011]
ROBERT A. REED, Professor of Electrical Engineering; Director of
Graduate Studies in Electrical Engineering
B.S. (East Tennessee State 1990); M.S., Ph.D. (Clemson 1993, 1994)
[2004]

School of Engineering / Administration and Faculty
JOHN JEFFREY REESE, Mildred Thornton Stahlman Chair in Perinatology;
Professor of Pediatrics; Professor of Cell and Developmental Biology;
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.A., M.D. (Kansas 1982, 1982) [2002]
CYNTHIA A. REINHART-KING, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
Biomedical Engineering; Director of Graduate Studies in Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2000); Ph.D.
(Pennsylvania 2006) [2017]
WILLIAM H. ROBINSON III, Associate Dean of the School of Engineering;
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering; Associate Professor of
Computer Engineering
B.S. (Florida Agricultural and Mechanical 1996); M.S., Ph.D. (Georgia
Institute of Technology 1998, 2003) [2003]
BAXTER P. ROGERS, Research Associate Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences; Research Associate Professor of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences; Research Associate Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Furman 1998); M.S., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2001, 2004) [2006]
BRIDGET R. ROGERS, Associate Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering
B.S. (Colorado 1984); M.S., Ph.D. (Arizona State 1990, 1998) [1998]
ROBERT J. ROSELLI, Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Chemical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1969, 1972, 1975) [1976]
SANDRA J. ROSENTHAL, Jack and Pamela Egan Professor of Chemistry;
Professor of Chemistry; Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering Professor of Materials Science and Engineering; Professor
of Pharmacology
B.S. (Valparaiso 1987); Ph.D. (Chicago 1993) [1996]
GERALD ROTH, Associate Professor of the Practice of Computer Science
B.S. (Gonzaga 1982); M.S. (Santa Clara 1987); M.S., Ph.D. (Rice
1993, 1997) [2006]
JOHN A. ROTH, Professor of Chemical Engineering, Emeritus; Professor
of Environmental Engineering, Emeritus
B.Ch.E., M.Ch.E., Ph.D. (Louisville 1956, 1957, 1961) [1962]
BERNARD ROUSSEAU, Associate Professor of Otolaryngology;
Associate Professor of Hearing and Speech Sciences; Associate
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S., M.A. (Central Florida 1998, 2000); Ph.D. (Wisconsin 2004) [2005]
WILLIAM H. ROWAN, JR., Professor of Computer Science, Emeritus
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1955); Ph.D. (North Carolina State 1965); P.E. [1950]
CHRISTOPHER J. ROWE, Professor of the Practice of Engineering
Management; Director of the Division of General Engineering; Director
of Communications
B.E., M.E., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 1996, 1998, 2008) [1998]
CAROL A. RUBIN, Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Emerita
B.S. (Columbia 1966); M.S., Ph.D. (Kansas State 1969, 1971) [1980]
PATRICIA K. RUSS, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Mississippi 1995); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1998, 2000) [2002]
MICHAEL RYAN, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Lowell Technological Institute 1974); M.S. (Massachusetts,
Lowell 1976); Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1982) [2006]
JANOS SALLAI, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering,
Computer Engineering and Computer Science
M.S. (Technical University of Budapest [Hungary] 2001); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2008) [2008]
FLORENCE SANCHEZ, Associate Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering; Associate Chair of Civil and Environmental Engineering;
Director of Graduate Studies, Environmental Engineering
M.S., Ph.D. (Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon
[France] 1992, 1996) [2000]
NILANJAN SARKAR, Professor of Mechanical Engineering; Professor of
Computer Engineering
B.E. (Calcutta [India] 1985); M.E. (Indian Institute of Science 1988);
Ph.D. (Pennsylvania 1993) [2000]

357
STEPHEN R. SCHACH, Professor of Computer Science, Emeritus;
Professor of Computer Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., B.S., M.S. (Cape Town [South Africa] 1966, 1967, 1969); M.S.
(Weizmann Institute of Science [Israel] 1972); Ph.D. (Cape Town
[South Africa] 1973) [1983]
JOSEPH J. SCHLESINGER, Assistant Professor of Hearing and Speech
Sciences; Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology; Assistant Professor
of the Practice of Biomedical Engineering; Adjunct Assistant Professor
of Nursing
B.A. (Loyola, New Orleans 2004); M.D. (Texas 2008) [2013]
DOUGLAS C. SCHMIDT, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
Computer Science; Professor of Computer Engineering; Associate
Chair of the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science
B.A., M.A. (William and Mary 1984, 1986); M.S., Ph.D. (California,
Irvine 1990, 1994) [2003]
KARL B. SCHNELLE, JR., Professor of Chemical and Environmental
Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Carnegie Institute of Technology 1952, 1957, 1959)
[1967]
RONALD D. SCHRIMPF, Orrin H. Ingram Chair in Engineering; Professor
of Electrical Engineering; Director of the Institute for Space and
Defense Electronics
B.E.E., M.S.E.E., Ph.D. (Minnesota 1981, 1984, 1986) [1996]
JULIE E. SHARP, Professor of the Practice of Technical Communications
B.A. (Belhaven 1968); M.A.T., M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1969, 1970,
1987) [1983]
RICHARD G. SHIAVI, Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Emeritus;
Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S. (Villanova 1965); M.S., Ph.D. (Drexel 1969, 1972) [1972]
VENIAMIN Y. SIDOROV, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
Ph.D. (Institute of Cell Biophysics [Russia] 2000) [2001]
BRIAN SIERAWSKI, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Engineering
B.S.E., M.S.E. (Michigan 2002, 2004); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2011) [2005]
CARLOS A. SILVERA BATISTA, Assistant Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering
B.E. (City College of New York 2005); Ph.D. (Florida 2011) [2017]
NABIL SIMAAN, Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Otolaryngology; Associate Professor of
Computer Science
B.S., M.Sci., Ph.D. (Technion [Israel] 1994, 1999, 2002) [2010]
AMBER L. SIMPSON, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.Sc. (Trent [Canada] 2000); M.Sc., Ph.D. (Queen’s [Canada] 2002,
2010) [2009]
MELISSA C. SKALA, Assistant Professor of Cancer Biology; Adjoint
Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Washington State 2002); M.S. (Wisconsin 2004); Ph.D. (Duke
2007) [2010]
SEAN SMITH, Adjunct Instructor in Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.S. (Southern California 1993) [2011]
SETH A. SMITH, Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Associate Professor of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences;
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., B.S. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute 2001, 2001); Ph.D. (Johns
Hopkins 2006) [2009]
RICHARD E. SPEECE, Centennial Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Emeritus
B.S. (Fenn College 1956); M.S. (Yale 1958); Ph.D. (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology 1961) [1988]
JEREMY P. SPINRAD, Associate Professor of Computer Science
B.S. (Yale 1978); M.S.E., M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1979, 1980, 1982)
[1985]
ERIC SPIVEY, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S.E. (Duke 1997); M.S., Ph.D. (Texas 2008, 2012) [2016]

E

358
MICHAEL G. STABIN, Associate Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Associate Professor of Physics; Associate Professor of Civil
and Environmental Engineering
B.S., M.E. (Florida 1981, 1983); Ph.D. (Tennessee 1996) [1998]
ROBERT E. STAMMER, JR., Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of the Practice of Civil Engineering
B.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1971); B.E. (Vanderbilt 1972); M.S.
(Georgia Institute of Technology 1974); Ph.D. (Tennessee 1981) [1981]
CHARLES V. STEPHENSON II, Professor of Electrical Engineering,
Emeritus
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1948, 1949, 1952) [1962]
JULIE ANNE STERLING, Assistant Professor of Medicine; Assistant
Professor of Cancer Biology; Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Bowling Green State 1998); Ph.D. (Medical College of Ohio
2003) [2008]
ANDREW L. STERNBERG, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Electrical
Engineering; Staff Engineer I of Institute for Space and Defense
Electronics
[1999]
ALVIN M. STRAUSS, Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.A. (CUNY, Hunter College 1964); Ph.D. (West Virginia 1968) [1982]
HONGYANG SUN, Research Assistant Professor of Computer Science
B.Eng. (Nanyang Technological [Singapore] 2005); M.Sc. (National
University of Singapore 2006); Ph.D. (Nanyang Technological
[Singapore] 2011) [2016]
HAK-JOON SUNG, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering;
Assistant Professor of Medicine
B.S., M.S. (Yonsei [Korea] 1999, 2001); Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of
Technology 2004) [2009]
JANOS SZTIPANOVITS, E. Bronson Ingram Distinguished Professor
of Engineering; E. Bronson Ingram Chair in Engineering; Professor
of Electrical Engineering and Professor of Computer Engineering;
Director of the Institute for Software Integrated Systems
Diploma, Ph.D. (Technical University of Budapest [Hungary] 1970,
1980); C.Sc. (Hungarian Academy of Science 1980) [1984]
MAZITA MOHD TAHIR, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Civil and
Environmental Engineering; Associate Director of PAVE
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1996, 1999, 2008) [2009]
ROBERT A. TAIRAS, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Computer
Science
B.Sc. (Samford 1997); M.Sc., Ph.D. (Alabama, Birmingham 2005,
2010) [2013]
ROBERT D. TANNER, Professor of Chemical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S.E., B.S.E., M.S.E. (Michigan 1961, 1962, 1963); Ph.D. (Case
Western Reserve 1967) [1972]
YUANKAI TAO, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Duke 2006, 2010, 2010) [2016]
EDWARD L. THACKSTON, Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Emeritus
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1961); M.S. (Illinois, Champaign 1963); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 1966) [1965]
BRYAN A. THARPE, Adjunct Instructor in Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1994) [2011]
WESLEY P. THAYER, Associate Professor of Plastic Surgery; Associate
Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation; Associate
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee 1993); Ph.D., M.D. (Emory 1999, 2000) [2008]
ERIC ROBERT TKACZYK, Assistant Professor of Medicine; Assistant
Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., B.S.E.E. (Purdue 2003, 2003); M.S.E., Ph.D., M.D. (Michigan
2007, 2010, 2010) [2016]
LORI A. TROXEL, Associate Professor of the Practice of Civil and
Environmental Engineering
B.S. (Purdue 1984); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1990, 1994) [1995]
HAMP TURNER, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
B.A., B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Rutgers 1988, 1988, 1992, 1995) [2012]

v anderbilt u niv ersity
JUSTIN HARRIS TURNER, Associate Professor of Otolaryngology;
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.E. (Vanderbilt 1998); Ph.D., M.D. (Medical University of South
Carolina 2006, 2006) [2012]
PIETRO VALDASTRI, Adjoint Professor of Mechanical Engineering
M.Sc. (Pisa [Italy] 2002); Ph.D. (Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna [Italy]
2006) [2011]
JASON G. VALENTINE, Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering; Assistant Professor of
Physics
B.S. (Purdue 2005); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2010) [2010]
HANS A. VAN DER SLOOT, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S., M.Sc., Ph.D. (Amsterdam [Netherlands] 1969, 1971, 1976) [2011]
ANDREW J. VAN SCHAACK, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Engineering Management; Principal Senior Lecturer in Human and
Organizational Development
B.S., Ph.D. (Utah State 2002, 2006) [2004]
DAVIDE VANZO, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Bologna [Italy] 2005, 2007, 2011) [2016]
JOHN R. VEILLETTE, Associate Professor of the Practice of Civil
Engineering; Director of PAVE
B.S., M.S. (Connecticut 1980, 1982); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1987) [1987]
PETER VOLGYESI, Lecturer in Computer Science; Research Scientist/
Engineer of Institute for Software Integrated Systems
M.S. (Technical University of Budapest [Hungary] 2000) [2000]
YEVGENIY VOROBEYCHIK, Assistant Professor of Computer Science
and Assistant Professor of Computer Engineering; Assistant Professor
of Biomedical Informatics
B.S. (Northwestern 2002); M.S.E., Ph.D. (Michigan 2004, 2008) [2013]
D. GREG WALKER, Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Auburn 1990, 1993); Ph.D. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute
1997) [1999]
MATTHEW WALKER III, Associate Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences; Associate Professor of the Practice of
Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee 1987); Ph.D. (Tulane 2000) [2011]
PEIYONG WANG, Adjoint Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. (Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics [China] 1998);
M.S. (Tsinghua [China] 2001); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006) [2009]
TAYLOR G. WANG, Centennial Professor of Mechanical Engineering,
Emeritus; Centennial Professor of Materials Science and Engineering,
Emeritus; Professor of Applied Physics, Emeritus
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1967, 1968, 1971) [1988]
ROBERT J. WEBSTER III, Associate Professor of Mechanical
Engineering; Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering; Associate
Professor of Otolaryngology; Associate Professor of Urologic Surgery;
Assistant Professor of Neurological Surgery
B.S. (Clemson 2002); M.S., Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins 2004, 2007) [2008]
SCOTT WEBSTER, Research Assistant Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
B.S. (Augusta 2005); Ph.D. (Medical College of Georgia 2012) [2017]
STEPHANIE WEEDEN-WRIGHT, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.S. (Seattle 2008); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2012, 2014) [2017]
JOSEPH A. WEHRMEYER, Adjoint Associate Professor of Mechanical
Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Southern Illinois 1981, 1986); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1990)
[1996]
MATTHEW BRET WEINGER, Norman Ty Smith Chair in Patient Safety
and Medical Simulation; Professor of Anesthesiology; Professor
of Biomedical Informatics; Professor of Medical Education and
Administration; Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering
M.S., B.S. (Stanford 1978, 1978); M.D. (California, San Diego 1982)
[2004]
JARED A. WEIS, Research Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Washington University 2005); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2009,
2011) [2011]

School of Engineering / Administration and Faculty
SHARON M. WEISS, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of Electrical
Engineering; Professor of Materials Science and Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Rochester 1999, 2001, 2005) [2005]
EDWARD BRIAN WELCH, Assistant Professor of Radiology and
Radiological Sciences; Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Southern California 1998); Ph.D. (Mayo Medical 2003) [2004]
ROBERT A. WELLER, Professor of Physics, Emeritus; Professor of
Electrical Engineering, Emeritus; Professor of Materials Science and
Engineering, Emeritus; Research Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S. (Tennessee 1971); Ph.D. (California Institute of Technology 1978)
[1987]
FRANCIS M. WELLS, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus
B.E., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1965, 1967, 1971) [1969]
JAMES J. WERT, George A. Sloan Professor of Metallurgy, Emeritus;
Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1957, 1958, 1961); P.E. [1961]
JAMES DAVID WEST, Professor of Medicine; Associate Professor of
Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (Missouri 1989); Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1996) [2007]
CHRISTOPHER JULES WHITE, Assistant Professor of Computer
Science; Assistant Professor of Computer Engineering
B.A. (Brown 2001); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006, 2008) [2011]
EDWARD J. WHITE, Professor of Electrical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S. (Iowa State 1958); M.E.E., D.Sc. (Virginia 1962, 1966) [1987]
JOHN P. WIKSWO, JR., Gordon A. Cain University Professor; A. B.
Learned Professor of Living State Physics; Professor of Biomedical
Engineering; Professor of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics
B.A. (Virginia 1970); M.S., Ph.D. (Stanford 1973, 1975) [1977]
D. MITCHELL WILKES, Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering;
Associate Professor of Computer Engineering
B.S. (Florida Atlantic 1981); M.S., Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of
Technology 1984, 1987) [1987]
JOHN W. WILLIAMSON, Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Emeritus
B.S. (Oklahoma 1955); M.S., Ph.D. (Ohio State 1959, 1965) [1964]
JOHN TANNER WILSON, Assistant Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering; Assistant Professor of Biomedical
Engineering
B.S. (Oregon State 2002); Ph.D. (Georgia Institute of Technology
2009) [2014]
THOMAS J. WITHROW, Assistant Dean for Design; Associate Professor
of the Practice of Mechanical Engineering
S.B. (Harvard 2000); M.S.E., M.S.E., Ph.D. (Michigan 2001, 2002,
2005) [2005]
JAMES E. WITTIG, Associate Professor of Materials Science and
Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Stanford 1978, 1980, 1985) [1987]
ARTHUR WITULSKI, Research Associate Professor of Electrical
Engineering
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Colorado 1981, 1986, 1988) [2006]
RYSZARD J. WYCISK, Research Associate Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering
B.S., Ph.D. (Wroclaw [Poland] 1984, 1993) [2011]
RAYMOND G. WYMER, Adjunct Professor of Civil and Environmental
Engineering
B.S. (Memphis State 1950); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1953, 1953) [2007]
JUNZHONG XU, Assistant Professor of Radiology and Radiological
Sciences; Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. (University of Science and Technology of China 2002); M.S.,
Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007, 2008) [2011]
YAQIONG XU, Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering; Associate
Professor of Physics
B.S. (Wuhan [China] 1997); Ph.D. (Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 2002); Ph.D. (Rice 2006) [2009]
DECAN YANG, Visiting Professor of Mechanical Engineering
Diploma (Hubei [China] 1981); M.S. (Wuhan [China] 1990); Ph.D.
(Tongji [China] 2006) [2015]

359
JAMEY D. YOUNG, Associate Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering; Associate Professor of Molecular Physiology and
Biophysics; Director of Graduate Recruiting for Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering
B.S. (Kentucky, Lexington 1999); Ph.D. (Purdue 2005) [2008]
MARIJA ZANIC, Assistant Professor of Cell and Developmental Biology;
Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
M.S. (Zagreb [Croatia] 1998); Ph.D. (Texas 2007) [2014]
KARL E. ZELIK, Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering; Assistant
Professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation; Assistant Professor
of Biomedical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Washington University 2006, 2007); Ph.D. (Michigan 2012)
[2014]
ENXIA ZHANG, Research Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering
B.S., M.S. (Nanjing [China] 2000, 2003); Ph.D. (Shanghai Institute of
Microsystem and Information Technology, CAS [China] 2006) [2008]
SHUNING ZHANG, Visiting Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
B.A. (Harbin Institute of Technology [China] 2000); M.A., Ph.D.
(Nanjing [China] 2003, 2006) [2016]
WUHENG ZUO, Visiting Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
B.S. (Chang’an University [China] 1996); M.S. (Zhejiang Institute of
Technology [China] 2002); Ph.D. (Zhejiang [China] 2013) [2016]

E

Peabody
College
P

Education and Human Development
at Vanderbilt 	

362

The Undergraduate Program 	

364

Licensure for Teaching  	

365

Academic Regulations  	

368

Special Programs  	

375

Interdisciplinary Majors 	

377

Majors in Child Development, Child Studies,
and Cognitive Studies  	

379

Majors in Early Childhood and Elementary
Education, and Secondary Education  	

386

Major in Human and Organizational
Development  	

388

Major in Special Education  	

390

Honors  	

392

Post-Baccalaureate Programs  	

393

Courses of Study  	

394

Administration and Faculty  	

409

362

vanderbilt university

Education and Human Development at Vanderbilt

G

eorge Peabody College for Teachers, recognized for
more than a century as one of the foremost independent colleges of teacher education, merged with
Vanderbilt University in the summer of 1979 to become
Vanderbilt University’s Peabody College of education and
human development. Since then, Peabody College has
retained its heritage while achieving new stature as a place
where world-class research is conducted and translated into
teaching, practice, policy, and service. Peabody's mission is
characterized by practice-oriented academic programs, a
strong service ethic, groundbreaking research, and a pressing concern for addressing social problems in domestic and
international contexts.
The college’s faculty and students constitute a vibrant intellectual community answering pressing questions and expanding knowledge about PreK–12 and higher education, including
special education; psychology, especially focused on families
and children; the development of individuals and organizations; and educational administration, leadership, and policy.
Peabody College understands the preparation of researchers,
teachers, and leaders as among the most important things it
does, and that building and sustaining an engaged academic
community of learners is central to achieving its mission.
Peabody faculty and students engage in a broad spectrum
of basic and applied research to generate new knowledge and
translate that knowledge into practice. Current research findings inform classroom teaching at Peabody in every program.
Moreover, Peabody faculty bring an interdisciplinary and entrepreneurial spirit to the research enterprise. Working collaboratively, often through one of the college’s research centers, faculty
and students publish and present their findings, apply them in
real-world settings, and help to shape public debate about the
nature and future of education and human development.
The college is devoted to enhancing opportunity in an
increasingly diverse society. More than 1,900 students are
enrolled at Peabody, with more than one-third of them in
post-baccalaureate graduate or professional degree programs.
All teacher education programs are accredited by the National
Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE).
Counseling programs are accredited by the Council for the
Accreditation of Counseling and Related Education Programs
(CACREP).

Centers and Outreach Efforts
Accelerated Academic Achievement (A3) Center
Funded with a grant of $10 million by the National Center for
Special Education Research, the A3 Center enables researchers to study instructional programs aimed at students with
learning disabilities in grades 3 to 5. Scholars affiliated with the
center seek to develop and test strategies to improve reading
and math success. The new instructional programs developed
at the center will help educators address challenges such as
how to assist students in progressing to more complex subject
matter and how to transfer learning between different intellectual tasks.

Center for Research on Rural Families and
Communities
The Center for Research on Rural Families and Communities serves as a change agent in promoting the well-being of
families and youth residing in rural communities. It does so
by collaborating with community stakeholders to develop and
conduct research benefiting community residents; designing
preventive interventions that promote positive development,
adjustment, and adaptation; implementing efficacy trials and
disseminating effective interventions; conducting studies to
advance knowledge about social, economic, and environmental impacts on rural culture and rural health disparities; and
informing effective policy interventions.
Classroom Organization and Management Program
(COMP)
COMP’s primary goal is to help teachers improve their overall
instructional and behavioral management skills through
planning, implementing, and maintaining effective classroom
practices. The program also seeks to improve student task
engagement and reduce inappropriate and disruptive behavior
through well-planned academic tasks and activities.
IRIS Center
The IRIS Center for Training Enhancements was designed in
response to a request from the U.S. Department of Education’s
Office of Special Education Programs. This national effort,
serving college faculty working in pre-service preparation programs, aims to ensure that general education teachers, school
administrators, school nurses, and school counselors are well
prepared to work with students who have disabilities and with
their families. IRIS is the nation’s only faculty enhancement
center established for this purpose.
National Center for Leadership in Intensive
Intervention
The National Center for Leadership in Intensive Intervention
prepares special education leaders to provide intensive intervention to students with disabilities who have persistent and severe
academic and behavioral difficulties. Funded by the Office of
Special Education Programs, the center is composed of a consortium of universities including Vanderbilt, Southern Methodist University, the University of Connecticut, the University of
Illinois at Chicago, the University of Minnesota, the University
of Texas at Austin, and Virginia Commonwealth University.
National Center on Performance Incentives
The National Center on Performance Incentives (NCPI), a
national research and development center, was established
in 2006 by a $10 million grant from the U.S. Department of
Education Institute of Education Sciences. NCPI conducts
randomized field trials and program evaluations to address
one of the most contested questions in public education: Do
financial incentives for teachers, administrators, and schools
affect the quality of teaching and learning?

Peabody College / Education and Human D evelopment at V anderbilt

363

National Center on Scaling Up Effective Schools
The National Center on Scaling Up Effective Schools is a
collaborative partnership of research universities, education
support providers, and two large urban school districts to
identify the essential programs, practices, processes, and policies that make some high schools particularly effective with
low-income students, minority students, and English language
learners. The center works with teachers and school district
leaders to share these practices with less-effective schools.

Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth
The Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth (SMPY) is a
fifty-year longitudinal study of five cohorts, consisting of more
than 5,000 intellectually talented individuals, identified over a
twenty-five-year period (1972–1997). The aim of this research
is to develop a better understanding of the unique needs of
intellectually precocious youth and the determinants of the
contrasting developmental trajectories they display over the
lifespan.

Next Steps at Vanderbilt
Next Steps at Vanderbilt is a two-year, nonresidential certification program for students with intellectual and developmental
disabilities, providing individualized programs of study in
the areas of education, social skills, and vocational training.
Next Steps is a comprehensive transition program designated
by the U.S. Department of Education. This status recognizes
the program’s merits and allows eligible students to apply for
federal financial aid for tuition assistance.

Susan Gray School for Children
The Susan Gray School for Children is an inclusive early
childhood education program serving young children with
and without disabilities, on site and in the community. The
mission of the Susan Gray School is to provide high-quality
services to children, families, and the community; to help
train university students who plan to be teachers, health care
providers, therapists, and researchers; to facilitate research;
and to demonstrate high-quality early childhood education
and special education practices.

Peabody Journal of Education
The Peabody Journal of Education, an interdisciplinary scholarly publication, fosters the development and dissemination
of knowledge related to important questions of education and
human development. The journal, in publication since 1923, is
published quarterly and distributed across the United States
and in twenty-five foreign countries.
Peabody Professional Institutes
Peabody Professional Institutes (PPI) provide short-term,
intensive educational experiences for professional educators
and administrators from across the nation and around the
world. Each institute draws from social science disciplines and
professional fields of study to inform the creation of a comprehensive, yet focused, curriculum. Designed with the same
expectations for rigor and depth as Peabody College degree
programs, PPI rest on the philosophy that good practice is best
derived from and informed by a strong theoretical base.
Peabody Research Institute
The Peabody Research Institute (PRI) conducts research
aimed at improving the effectiveness of programs for children,
youth, and families. This mission encompasses educational
programs and other interventions aimed at increasing the
well-being of children and their families. Research may
address any aspect of relevant practices, programs, or
policies—e.g., their effectiveness, implementation, costs,
dissemination, or social/political support—but the emphasis
is on evaluating their effects on the children and families
they serve. To bridge between research and practice, PRI also
provides technical assistance and consultation to programs,
practitioners, and policy makers aimed at improving services
for children and families.
Principals Leadership Academy of Nashville
The Principals Leadership Academy of Nashville is a joint
undertaking of Peabody, the Nashville Public Education
Foundation, and Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools. The
academy develops educational leaders for the Nashville school
system who are creative and courageous professionals capable
of encouraging the best practices in teaching and learning.

Vanderbilt Center for Science Outreach
The Vanderbilt Center for Science Outreach (CSO) is dedicated to enhancing literacy in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) through the establishment
of unique partnerships between university scientists, K–12
educators and students, and the local and global science
community. CSO has developed and implemented a number
of education programs in partnership with local and national
K–12 classrooms, including the School for Science and Math at
Vanderbilt. These efforts have reached thousands of children,
supported teachers in residence on the Vanderbilt campus,
hosted summer professional development courses and workshops for teachers, offered summer programs for students,
and placed teachers and students in research laboratories. As
a national leader in outreach efforts, the CSO is commited to
elevating pre-collegiate STEM expertise and literacy.
Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human
Development
The Vanderbilt Kennedy Center is one of fourteen national
centers for research on intellectual disabilities and developmental disorders. Its primary mission is to better understand
human development, to prevent and solve developmental
problems, and to enable persons with developmental disabilities to lead fuller lives. The Kennedy Center is a universitywide center with institutional support shared by Peabody
College, the School of Medicine, and the College of Arts and
Science.
Vanderbilt Programs for Talented Youth
Vanderbilt Programs for Talented Youth seeks to identify
and aid academically talented youth from diverse educational,
racial, and economic backgrounds by providing academic
enrichment and challenge, while fostering balance and
healthfulness in their lives. Begun in 2000 as a summer residential academic program, Programs for Talented Youth has
expanded its mission and programming to provide engaging
and intellectually appropriate educational opportunities to
precocious young students, and to offer support for parents
and educators year-round.

P

364

VANDERBILT

UNIVERSITY

The Undergraduate Program

P

EABODY College offers the bachelor of science with
majors in early childhood and elementary education,
secondary education, special education, cognitive studies, child development, child studies, and human and organizational development. These undergraduate programs are
designed to prepare students for professional careers in their
chosen fields. Programs for Peabody students include course
work in a Liberal Education Core, a professional core, a major
area of specialization, and electives. Peabody also provides
professional education courses for College of Arts and Science
students who want to prepare for teacher licensure.
The bachelor of science is granted on the basis of 120
semester hours of college work with a final grade point average of 2.000, and completion of the Liberal Education Core
and the requirements of the major.

Liberal Education Core Program
In pursuit of breadth of knowledge and understanding about
the world in which they live, all undergraduates complete the
requirements of the Liberal Education Core program. This
Liberal Education Core component of all Peabody undergraduate majors is intended to provide students with a solid
foundation in the arts and sciences. The core curriculum
incorporates the study of human conditions that are universal.
The Liberal Education Core involves study in the following
areas:
Communications. The study of language in its written and
spoken forms.
Mathematics. The study of mathematical concepts and
procedures.
Social Sciences. The study of the past—both the heritage of
the United States and the more global human story. The study
of growth and development of individuals.
Humanities. The study of the universal language of the arts.
Natural Sciences. The study of scientific process and interrelationships among the sciences.

Through the study of these universal subjects, concepts,
and modes of thought, students gain a broad foundation
transferable to their futures. They will continue to grow within
society and the classroom and will look at problems from different perspectives while maintaining curiosity.
Courses identified to fulfill the Liberal Education Core
requirement for each undergraduate major are listed in Peabody’s Undergraduate Handbook (http://peabody.vanderbilt.
edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).
Courses used to satisfy these core requirements may also be
counted toward the fulfillment of requirements in an academic
major. Special topics courses are ordinarily not acceptable for
meeting Liberal Education Core requirements. These courses
require prior approval as substitute courses. Independent
study courses are not acceptable for meeting Liberal Education
Core requirements.
Transfer students may use credits from other colleges to
fulfill Peabody’s Liberal Education Core requirements if the
credits are equivalent to the courses offered at Vanderbilt.
The use of transfer courses to satisfy Liberal Education Core
requirements must be approved by the Dean’s Office. For
transfer students, credits are evaluated when the student
enrolls at Peabody in order to determine which transfer
courses will substitute for Peabody’s Liberal Education Core
requirements. Requirements still to be fulfilled will be noted at
that time.

Peabody College / Licensure for Teaching

365

Licensure for Teaching

P

EABODY offers programs leading to teacher licensure in
the following areas: early childhood (grades PreK–3), elementary (grades K–5), and secondary education (grades
6–12) with endorsement in English, math, biology, chemistry,
physics, earth science, history, and political science. (Added
endorsements are available also in economics, psychology, and
sociology for those who will have a history endorsement.) An
added endorsement program also is available in English as a
Second Language (grades PreK–12). All of these programs are
offered by the Department of Teaching and Learning.
Special education–interventionist (LD/BD for grades K–8
or 6–12), comprehensive (multiple/severe for grades K–12), or
visual impairment (grades PreK–12). All three of these programs are offered by the Department of Special Education.
Vanderbilt’s Blair School of Music and Peabody College offer a
program for students interested in teacher licensure with endorsement in the following: (1) instrumental/general music (grades K–12),
or (2) vocal/general music (grades K–12). Blair students complete the
first part of the program as part of the bachelor of music degree and
apply during the senior year to continue into the master of education degree for a final year of professional education.
Students seeking licensure may enroll in Peabody College,
the College of Arts and Science, or the Blair School of Music. In
all cases, most of the liberal arts course work is taken in the College of Arts and Science, and the professional education course
work is taken at Peabody College.
All students completing a teacher education program at
Vanderbilt are strongly advised to apply for a license in Tennessee
whether or not they plan to teach in this state. In addition, licensure
is available by application in other states. The student is responsible
for applying for licensure through the Office of Teacher Licensure
located in the Peabody Administration Building. Each state has its
own application forms and procedures for licensure; information is
available in the Office of Teacher Licensure.
Licensure requirements continue to undergo revision.
Students must meet licensure requirements in effect at the
time of their program completion, which may be different
from requirements in effect at the time they entered the
program. Each year, teacher education students should consult
the current Vanderbilt Undergraduate Catalog or the Peabody
Undergraduate Handbook available in the Office of Academic
Services in the Peabody Administration Building. The licensure website (peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/teacherlicensure/index.php) provides additional information.

Security Clearance Requirement
As of the start of fall semester 2017, all students matriculating into
Peabody College must have security clearance. In addition, all
students from any Vanderbilt school must have security clearance
if they take any Peabody course involving interaction with minors
or other vulnerable populations, or if they engage in Peabody
research or Peabody programs/related activities that require security clearance. Obtaining this security clearance involves being fingerprinted through an external agency for a criminal background
check by the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. Students are responsible for paying the
fees for this process. Students must complete the fingerprinting
that starts the clearance process no later than the end of the first
two weeks of the semester in which the fingerprinting becomes

required. Detailed instructions for completing the security clearance process can be found on the Peabody Background Clearance
Office website: peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/bco/index.php.
Vanderbilt students may not participate in any Peabody Collegerelated activities involving PreK-12 students or vulnerable adults
until their background clearance is finalized at Peabody.
Degree Audits
Electronic degree audits enable students and faculty advisers to track each student’s progress in the degree program at
Peabody. The departmental handbooks describe access to and
use of online Peabody major degree audits to view program
requirements recognized as “met” or “unmet” at any time in
the student’s program. The degree audit also denotes permissions for waivers or course substitutions. Degree audits are
managed in the Peabody Office of Academic Services.
SCREENING
There are two points in each teacher education program when
undergraduates must complete applications for screenings
by departmental faculty. Screening requirements continue to
undergo revision and are subject to change. Students must
meet screening requirements in effect at the time of their
application, which may be different from requirements stated
below. Screening reviews, described below, are important
checkpoints that allow successful students to advance in the
program. Attainment of 2.75 (4.0) cumulative grade point
average and completion of required courses do not automatically qualify a student for continuation in the program.
Faculty evaluation of a student’s qualifications for continuation in a teacher education program include academic,
performance, and disposition factors such as the following:
1. Dependability (as evidenced by good attendance in classes
and practica and the completion of required assignments
and procedures on time)
2. Professional and ethical behavior (honesty, acceptance of
responsibility, emotional maturity, etc.)
3. Attitude and interpersonal skills (including the ability to
work with children and with peers)
4. Academic competence (It is possible for a student to meet
minimum grade point requirements and pass all courses
and still have specific academic weaknesses which might
cause denial of screening applications.)
Students seeking teacher licensure must be approved
by each department through which licensure is sought.
Secondary licensure candidates should contact an adviser
or the director of undergraduate studies in the appropriate Arts and Science department(s) to be informed of any
specific departmental requirements or standards.
5. Teaching competence (as evidenced by successful completion of practica requirements). It is possible for a student
to meet minimum grade point requirements and pass all
courses and still have specific performance weaknesses
which might cause denial of screening applications.
These criteria rest on the professional judgment of faculty
members. Whether a student meets them or not is determined

P

366

by a vote of appropriate faculty. Undergraduate students seeking secondary education licensure must be approved by the
Department of Teaching and Learning faculty and also by the
faculty of College of Arts and Science department(s) for the
Arts and Science major(s).
Screening deadlines are October 1 and February 1. Undergraduates must apply for Screening I during spring of the
sophomore year or fall of the junior year. Screening II must be
done in the fall of the senior year, restricting undergraduate
student teaching in special education and secondary education
to the spring of the senior year.* Deadlines are firm; late applications will not be accepted. The Screening I and II application
form is online at peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/teacherlicensure/licensure_for_undergraduate_students/screening.php
and should be submitted online no later than the deadline.
(NOTE: Screening II applications require additional documents
when submitted. See specific requirements with the application.)
Students will be notified of results of the faculty vote at the
end of the screening semester. In instances where there is a
negative decision, the student wishing to appeal must do so
in writing to the chairperson(s) of the department(s) denying
the application. If the initial decision is upheld and the student
wishes to continue the appeal, a written petition should be
filed with the Administrative Committee of Peabody College.
* Screening II applications for student teaching in Early Childhood or Elementary
Education may be submitted in the second semester of the junior year for fall
student teaching.

Screening I (Formal Admission to an Undergraduate
Teacher Education Program)
Each student seeking teacher licensure must be formally
admitted to the teacher education program(s) by completing
an online application for Screening I review by the faculty
of the department(s) in which endorsement(s) is/are sought.
Candidates normally apply for Screening I during spring of
the sophomore year or fall of the junior year, depending on
their program area (candidates should consult their department handbook for timelines in their program area). Deadlines are February 1 in the spring and October 1 in the fall.
Students who transfer more than 60 hours to Vanderbilt from
another institution must apply for admission to the teacher
education program by the screening deadline of their second
semester at Vanderbilt.
An initial screening review by the faculty will occur soon
after the Screening I deadline. If there are concerns noted, the
student will be counseled. The final faculty review and decision will be done toward the end of the semester.
Criteria for Screening I (formal admission to teacher
education) are:
A. Specific Academic Criteria
1. Test scores (SAT composite score of 780 or ACT 21, OR
passing scores on the Praxis I Core Academic Skills for
Educators)
2. Minimum cumulative grade point average of 2.75 (4-point
scale)
3. Successful completion of at least two of the required professional education courses as defined by the program area
with a minimum grade of C+
4. Department interview

vanderbilt university

B. Specific Faculty Evaluative Criteria
The faculty will consider the disposition criteria of dependability, professional and ethical behavior, attitude and interpersonal skills, and teaching competence as itemized at the
beginning of the Screening section.
Screening II (Admission to Student Teaching)
Admission to Student Teaching is not automatic when prerequisite course work and field experiences have been completed.
Special education majors and secondary education majors
must submit the online Screening II application in the fall of
the senior year. For elementary majors and early childhood
majors in the Department of Teaching and Learning, the
student must submit the online Screening II application the
semester prior to the one during which a student is to student
teach. Secondary education majors may student teach in
spring semesters only, so they must apply for Screening II in
the fall semester of their senior year. Deadlines are October 1
for fall semesters, February 1 for spring semesters. At the time
of screening application, the student should be enrolled in any
remaining prerequisite courses. No course work may be taken
during the semester of student teaching and seminar.
After an initial review in the Office of Teacher Licensure,
the Screening II application and other submitted materials will
be considered by departmental faculty according to the following criteria for Screening II approval to student teach:
A. Specific Academic Criteria
1. Formal admission to a teacher education program granted
(completion of Screening I)
2. Second semester junior standing (for student teaching in
the fall of the senior year) or first semester senior standing
(for student teaching in the spring of the senior year)
3. Successful completion (C+ or above) of all courses required
and prerequisite to student teaching as defined by the
program area
4. Minimum cumulative grade point average of 2.75 (4.0 scale)
5. Satisfactory performance (C+ or above) in coursework in
areas in which teacher licensure is sought
6. Successful completion of Standard First Aid and CPR
training (attach certificate copies to the Screening II
application)
B. Specific Faculty Evaluative Criteria
The faculty will consider the disposition criteria of dependability, professional and ethical behavior, attitude and interpersonal skills, and teaching competence as itemized at the
beginning of the Screening section.
Each Scr­eening II application requires additional documents, depending on the program. A copy of first aid and CPR
verification of training completed within the previous two
years must be submitted to the Office of Teacher Licensure by
the October 1 or February 1 deadline. In addition, some programs have additional requirements that are prerequisite to
Screening II application. Students should consult departmental handbooks. Screening II applicants who are approved to
student teach will receive notification of their student teaching
placements no later than during the Student Teacher Orientation at the beginning of the student teaching semester.
Students who have passed Screening II are assigned two
specific student teaching placements in the Nashville area.

Peabody College / L icensure for T eaching

Student Teaching
Vanderbilt students seeking teacher licensure must successfully
complete a 15-week semester of full-time student teaching
in two different grade levels in Nashville area public schools
and must be recommended for licensure by the supervisors of
student teaching and departmental faculty. Students seeking
early childhood or elementary licensure may apply for fall
or spring student teaching. Secondary education and special
education student teaching may be done only in the spring
semester. Prior to the start of student teaching, all prerequisite
courses must have been completed, the cumulative GPA must
be at least 2.75, and the appropriate departmental faculties
must have voted to approve the candidate for student teaching
during the previous semester as part of the Screening II application process. The Tennessee State Department of Education
and Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools prohibit student
teachers from taking courses during student teaching. See the
departmental Undergraduate Handbook for details.
Application for Teacher Licensure and
University Recommendation for Licensure
All students completing the teacher education program
at Vanderbilt are strongly advised to apply for a license in
Tennessee whether or not they plan to teach in this state.
In addition, licensure is available in most other states. The
student is responsible for applying for licensure through the
Office of Teacher Licensure located in the Peabody Administration Building. Each state has its own application forms and
procedures for licensure; information is available in the Office
of Teacher Licensure.
To be licensed through Vanderbilt’s teacher education
program, a graduate must earn a positive licensure recommendation from the University. The University’s decision to
recommend a candidate is based upon the following:
1. Maintaining the grade point average required for admission
to the teacher education program (2.75 on a 4.0 scale).
2. For Tennessee licensure, achieving the state minimum
score on all required parts of the PRAXIS II Series and
edTPA (scores must be sent to the Vanderbilt Office of
Teacher Licensure–code R 1871, and the Tennessee Department of Education–code R 8190).*
3. Receiving a positive recommendation from the student’s
department as a result of the student teaching experience
(Pass in student teaching does not guarantee a favorable
recommendation).
* Testing requirements are changing almost annually; check instructions in the Office
of Teacher Licensure or at peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/teacher-licensure/
index.php before registering to take the exams.

367

Accreditation
Vanderbilt University is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges to
award bachelor’s, master’s, professional, and doctoral degrees.
Contact the Commission on Colleges at 1866 Southern Lane,
Decatur, Georgia 30033-4097, call (404) 679-4500, or visit
sacscoc.org for questions about the accreditation of Vanderbilt
University.
Please contact the commission only in relation to Vanderbilt’s noncompliance with accreditation requirements. Normal
inquiries about admission requirements, educational programs, and financial aid should be directed to the university.
Vanderbilt is accredited by the National Council for
Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE). Its teacher
licensure programs also are approved by the Tennessee
Department of Education and the following specialty professional associations:
National Council for Teachers of English (NCTE)
Council for Exceptional Children (CEC)
National Association for the Education of Young Children
(NAEYC)
Association for Childhood Education International (ACEI)
Council for the Accreditation of Counseling and Related
Education Programs (CACREP)
National Association for Schools of Music (NASM)

P

368

VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY

Academic Regulations
Honor System
All academic work at Vanderbilt is done under the honor
system. (See the Honor System section in Life at Vanderbilt.)
Academic Advising
Each Peabody undergraduate is assigned an academic adviser
who is familiar with his or her major. This adviser is generally
a faculty member in the major department and is knowledgeable about the courses the student will need to complete his
or her major. The adviser helps the student determine the
courses that are most suitable for the chosen major and serves
as a mentor to the student. However, enrollment in appropriate courses to fulfill degree requirements and knowledge of
university policies and regulations regarding courses are the
responsibility of the individual student.
Class Attendance
Students are expected to attend all scheduled meetings of classes
in which they are enrolled; they have an obligation to contribute
to the academic performance of all students by full participation in the work of each class. At the beginning of the semester,
instructors explain the policy regarding absences in each of their
classes, and thereafter they report to the office of the dean of the
college the name of any student whose achievement in a course
is being adversely affected by excessive absences. In such cases,
the dean, in consultation with the instructor, takes appropriate
action, which may include dropping the student from the class;
students dropped after the deadline for withdrawal receive the
grade F. Class attendance may be specified as a factor in determining the final grade in a course, and it cannot fail to influence
the grade even when it is not considered explicitly.
Course Load
A student must be enrolled in a minimum of 12 hours to be
classified as a full-time student. Students wishing to carry more
than 18 hours must obtain the approval of the dean of Peabody
Student Affairs Office. All undergraduate students are assumed
to be full-time students for the purpose of administering probation and retention policies. A student who for reasons of health,
family, or outside employment wishes to enroll in Peabody as
a part-time student must obtain permission from the dean of
Peabody Student Affairs Office. The academic standing of such
students will be considered on an individual basis. Normally,
however, a student earning less than 12 hours will either be
placed on academic probation or issued an academic warning.
Residence Requirement
Students must complete a minimum of 60 hours in residence
at Vanderbilt including the final two semesters.
Credit by Examination
In certain circumstances students may be awarded course credit
by departmental examination. (This procedure is distinct from
the award of credit through the College Board Advanced Placement Tests taken prior to a student’s first enrollment.)
Students wanting to earn credit by departmental examination should consult the Peabody Office of Academic Services

concerning procedures. To be eligible, students must be carrying a minimum of 12 hours and be in good standing.
Students must obtain the approval of the chair of the department that is to give the examination and the instructor designated
by the chair. Students may earn up to 30 hours of credit by any
combination of credit through advanced placement examinations
and credit by departmental examination. Students may earn up to
8 hours of credit by examination in any one department. Students
may attempt to obtain credit by examination no more than twice
in one semester and no more than twice in one course. Students
may not repeat a course for grade replacement under the credit by
examination procedures.
Credit hours and grade are awarded on the basis of the grade
earned on the examination, subject to the policy of the department
awarding credit. Students have the option of refusing to accept the
credit hours and grade after learning the results of the examination.
Students enrolled for at least 12 hours are not charged extra
tuition for hours earned through credit by examination, so long
as the amount of credit falls within the allowable limits of an
18-hour tuition load, including no-credit courses and courses
dropped after the change period. Students in this category
must pay a $50 fee for the cost of constructing, administering,
and grading the examination. Since this cost has already been
incurred, students who refuse the credit hours and grade are
charged the $50 fee nevertheless.
Full-time students with a tuition load exceeding 18 hours
and students taking fewer than 12 hours pay tuition at the
hourly tuition rate.
Security Clearance Requirement
See page 374.
Liberal Education Core Guidelines
Applicants to Peabody College will be required to take the SAT I
or ACT writing test and the SAT II mathematics test. Human
and organizational development majors do not need the SAT
II mathematics test. The following application of these scores
will be made to the Peabody Liberal Education Core:

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of 660 on the evidence-based reading and writing
component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27
on the reading component and 28 on the writing and language
component, or ACT English test score of 27 or above and a
minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully
complete English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all
freshmen must successfully complete one writing-intensive
course before their fourth semester. Writing-intensive courses
either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses) or
end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before
graduation, all students must successfully complete a second
writing course.
First-year seminars (courses labeled 1111) offered through
the College of Arts and Science and Blair School of Music may
count as writing-intensive courses. Peabody freshmen may
register for first-year seminars when open registration begins.

Peabody College / A cademic R egulations

Mathematics:
Students with first majors in early childhood and elementary, secondary, or special education with an SAT II Mathematics test score
at or above 620 (Level I) or at or above 570 (Level II) are exempt
from three hours of the math component of the Liberal Education
Core mathematics category. Students with an exemption must take
an additional three credit hours in their Liberal Education Core
elective category to have the minimum required sixty-hour core.
Students must take a statistics course if required for their major.
Students with first majors in child development, child studies, cognitive studies, or human and organizational development must take six hours as stated in the Liberal Education
Core mathematics category.
Undergraduate Enrollment in 5000–8000-level
Courses
All students wishing to take 5000–8000-level courses for either
undergraduate or graduate credit must obtain the written
approval of their academic advisers, the instructor of the course,
and the Office of Academic Services. Some courses are designed
to enroll both undergraduate and graduate/professional students
in the same class section. Such courses will typically have two
course numbers, one in the graduate range (5000–8000) and one
in the undergraduate range (usually either 3000– or 4000–level).
Unless they wish to take the course for post-baccalaureate credit,
undergraduates must register for the course using the undergraduate course number and may do so without any special permission. Undergraduates wishing to receive approval for graduate
credit in 5000–8000-level courses also see below.
Undergraduate Enrollment for Post-Baccalaureate
Credit
A qualified Vanderbilt University senior undergraduate may
enroll in courses approved for post-baccalaureate credit and
receive credit which, upon the student’s admission into a Peabody College professional program, may be applicable toward
the professional degree. The principles governing this option are
as follows:
1. Work taken under this option is limited to those 5000–
8000-level courses approved for post-baccalaureate credit,
excluding thesis and dissertation research courses and
similar individual research and readings courses.
2. Such work must be in excess of that required for the bachelor’s degree.
3. At the time of registration, the student must have a B
average in all prior work to be counted toward the bachelor’s degree, or a B average in all prior work to be counted
toward the undergraduate major, or a B average in the
preceding two semesters.
4. Undergraduate students wishing to count for postbaccalaureate credit courses taken under this option must
consult the instructor of each course and must, at the time
of registration, declare their intention on a form available
at the Office of Academic Services.
5. The student’s total course load (graduate plus undergraduate courses) must not exceed 15 hours during any semester
in which graduate credit is pursued.
6. Permission for Vanderbilt undergraduates to enroll in
post-baccalaureate courses does not constitute a commitment on the part of any department to accept the student

369

in the future. Courses taken under this option are subject
to departmental approval before they may be included on
post-baccalaureate programs of study.
7. An undergraduate student exercising this option will be
treated as a post-baccalaureate student with regard to class
requirements and grading standards.
Interested students should consult the Peabody Office of
Academic Services to verify their eligibility as defined above
before attempting to register for post-baccalaureate course
work under this option.
Undergraduate Enrollment for an Independent Study
Independent study courses, ranging from one to three hours of
credit, are listed in the Schedule of Courses and are intended for
students in their junior and senior years. Students wanting to
undertake an independent study must follow these guidelines:
1. Students must be in academic “good standing” (may not be
on probation or Leave of Absence).
2. Students must arrange the independent study with a
Vanderbilt full time faculty member who has agreed to
supervise and grade this experience.
3. Students may enroll for up to 3 hours of independent study
in one semester.
4. Students must make a written study plan detailing the
nature of the project and the amount of credit. The Individual Learning/Directed Study contract must be approved
by the instructor and the department chair (or the chair’s
designee) by the last day of the change period.
5. Registration for the course occurs when the completed
Individual Learning/Directed Study contract is submitted
to the Peabody Office of Academic Services. Registration
for an independent study will not be allowed after the
change period has ended.
Students may not repeat independent study courses for
grade replacement.
Transfer Credit/Summer Courses Off Campus
Students who transfer from another institution must have a
final transcript sent directly to the Undergraduate Admissions
Office, Vanderbilt University. Upon acceptance, students
will be asked to submit course descriptions and syllabi for all
proposed transfer credit. The Peabody Office of Academic
Services, in consultation with other appropriate academic
units, will evaluate the course work to determine which credits
will transfer and which requirements (e.g., Liberal Education
Core, professional core) are met by the transfer courses. No
course for which a student received the grade D+ or lower will
transfer. Course work transferred to Vanderbilt from another
institution will not carry with it a grade point average.
Transfer students must complete at least 60 hours of work
at Vanderbilt. Two of the four semesters in residence must be
the last two semesters of the student’s degree program.
Peabody students who wish to take course work during
the summer at a four-year, regionally accredited college or
university and transfer up to 12 hours to Vanderbilt must be
in good standing with at least a C average. Prior approval from
the Peabody Office of Academic Services must be granted for
all courses to be taken elsewhere. Course work transferred to
Vanderbilt from another institution will not carry with it a
grade point average.

P

370

Students who wish to participate in a non-Vanderbilt overseas program should complete the appropriate transfer of credit
forms and apply for a leave of absence for the relevant semester.
To qualify for such a leave, a student must be in good standing with at least a 2.700 grade point average as of the date of
application. Students must obtain prior approval for the leave of
absence and for up to 15 hours of credit to be taken in the other
program if the credit is to be transferred to Vanderbilt. Petitions
for leaves of this type must be filed at least one month before
the close of the preceding semester. Final approval of leaves
of absence always rests with the Dean’s Office. All students
traveling abroad must register their trips through International
SOS. It should be noted, however, that if a program has been
approved for direct credit by Vanderbilt, it must be taken as
the approved direct-credit program by matriculated Vanderbilt
students. In no case, after matriculating at Vanderbilt, may
a student apply to participate in an approved direct-credit
program for transfer credit through a different university, or
through an external agency, and then seek to transfer that credit
into Vanderbilt.
Students enrolled full time (i.e., carrying at least 12 credit
hours) during a regular (fall or spring) semester are assumed
to be engaged in full-time study at Vanderbilt. Such students
are not permitted to take additional course work elsewhere,
for transfer credit, during the semester. This includes online
courses as well as courses offered by nearby institutions.
Declaration of Major and of Second Major
Peabody students declare a major as part of the application
process prior to admission. In their first semester, Peabody
freshmen are expected to take coursework recommended for
the major into which they were admitted. Students wishing to
change into a different major within Peabody cannot declare
this change until March of their first year, to take effect in fall
of their second year. Second majors must be declared no later
than the second semester of the sophomore year. Also during
the sophomore year, students majoring in secondary education,
special education, and human and organizational development
will be required to declare their area of specialization or track.
Overlap in Course Work between Multiple Majors
and Minors
Students pursuing multiple majors and/or optional minors are
limited in the amount of course work that can be shared across
their major and minor programs of study. If the major or minor
is offered through a school other than Peabody, the amount of
course work that can be shared between that major or minor
and other majors or minors is determined by that school’s
policies. For a major offered through Peabody College, at least
21 credit hours need to be unique to that major. That is, 21 hours
within the major cannot be used to count toward any other
major or minor. For a minor offered through Peabody College,
at least 15 hours need to be unique to that minor.
Senior Re-examination
A candidate for graduation who fails not more than one course
in the final semester may be allowed one re-examination,
provided the course failed prevents the student’s graduation,
and provided the student could pass the course by passing
a re-examination. Certain courses may be excluded from
reexamination.
The re-examination must be requested through the
Office of the Associate Deans, and if approved, it is given

vanderbilt university

immediately after the close of the last semester of the student’s
senior year. A student who passes the re-examination will
receive a D– in the course. The terms and administration of
senior re-examination are the responsibility of the school that
offers the course.
Grading System
Peabody College undergraduate students are on a four-point grading system. All work is graded by letters, interpreted as follows:
A:
B:
C:
D:
F:

excellent
good
satisfactory
minimum pass work
failure

Under certain circumstances the following grades may be awarded:
W:
P:
M:
I:
MI:

withdrawal
pass (see Pass/D/Fail course provision)
missed final examination
incomplete in some requirement other than final examination
missed final examination with additional incomplete requirements

Plus and minus modifiers may be associated with the
letters A through D as shown in the table below. Grade point
averages are calculated using indicated grade point values.

Defined Grades with Corresponding Grade Points per
Credit Hour
A
A–
B+
B
B–
C+

=
=
=
=
=
=

4.0
3.7
3.3
3.0
2.7
2.3

C
C–
D+
D
D–
F

=
=
=
=
=
=

2.0
1.7
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.0

Grade Point Average
A student’s grade point average is obtained by dividing the
grade points earned by the hours for which the student has
registered, excluding courses taken for no credit, those from
which the student has withdrawn, and those that are completed with the grade P.

Audit
Regularly enrolled Peabody College students who want to audit
courses in any of the undergraduate schools of the university must
obtain the written consent of the instructor to attend the class but
do not register for the course for credit. Forms are available from
the Peabody Office of Academic Services, 216 Peabody Administration Building. No permanent record is kept of the audit.
Regular students may audit one class each semester free of charge.

Pass/Fail
Students may elect to take some courses in which they can
receive the grade P (Pass). This grade is entered for the student
enrolled under the P/F option who is awarded a grade of D- or
higher. The grade P is neither counted in the grade point average nor used in the determination of honors. A failing grade
will appear on the student record as F and will be counted in
the student’s grade point average.
To be eligible for the P/F option, the student must have
completed two regular semesters at Vanderbilt and must
not be on academic probation. No more than one course per
semester may be taken on a P/F basis and no more than three

Peabody College / A cademic R egulations

total during the undergraduate career. No more than one
course from any Liberal Education Core area (e.g., communications, humanities) may be taken under this option.
The P/F option does not apply to courses in the following
categories:
1. Liberal Education Core Courses that have been specifically
identified by the student’s primary major as needing to be
taken on a graded basis. By program, these courses are:
Human and Organizational Development: Courses taken to satisfy the
3-hour Liberal Core Economic requirement (i.e., Econ 1010, 		
1020, HOD 2260);
Child Development, Child Studies, and Cognitive Studies: Courses 		
taken to satisfy the 3-hour Liberal Core Statistics requirement 		
(i.e., Econ 1500, PSY-PC 2110, Psy 2100).
Special Education: PSY-PC 1250, PSY-PC 2600, EDUC 1220, SPED 		
1210, SPED 2120, SPED 2430, SPED 2160, SPED 3348.
Early Childhood Education: ENED 2430, EDUC 3750, ENED 2100, 		
MTED 2100,PSY-PC 1250, SSED 2100.
Elementary Education: ENED 2430, EDUC 3750, 2200, MTED 2200, 		
SCED 2200, PSY-PC 1250.
Secondary Education: PSY-PC 2550.

2. For students with a single or double major, courses in the
department(s) of the major(s) or other courses that may be
counted for the major(s);
3. For students with an interdisciplinary major, courses listed
in the student’s plan of study;
4. For students planning an optional minor, courses in the
department of the minor or those counting toward an
interdisciplinary minor.
Students taking a course on a P/F basis must be enrolled
for at least 12 hours on a regularly graded basis. If a student
drops a course and falls below 12 graded hours, the P/F course
is converted automatically to a regularly graded basis.
Seniors who meet the above criteria and have permission to
take fewer than 12 hours on a graded basis may take one course
on a P/F basis in one of their last two semesters (e.g., a semester in
which an internship or student teaching is not being taken). If the
student does not graduate at the end of the senior year, the grade
of P is automatically converted to the grade actually earned.
All P/F students are expected to meet normal course
requirements (e.g., reports, papers, examinations, laboratory
attendance) and are graded in a normal way. At the end of the
semester, students enrolled on a P/F basis are awarded a regular grade. Any grade of D- or better is converted in the Student
Records System to a P, while an F grade remains as awarded.
A student taking a course on a P/F basis must meet the course
prerequisites as set forth in this catalog.
Students register for a course on a P/F basis on a Pass/Fail
Declaration form available in 216 Peabody Administration
Building during a registration appointment window or during
open enrollment. After the first week of classes, students may
change from a P/F basis to a regularly graded basis—but not
from a regularly graded basis to a P/F basis—until the end of
the eighth week of classes. These deadlines are published in the
calendar. When a student wishes to complete a major or minor
in a field in which a grade of P has been received, the registrar
converts this grade to the regular grade originally earned.
Credit Hour Definition
Credit hours are semester hours; e.g., a three-hour course
carries credit of three semester hours. One semester credit hour
represents at least three hours of academic work per week, on

371

average, for one semester. Academic work includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, lectures, laboratory work, homework,
research, class readings, independent study, internships, practica, studio work, recitals, practicing, rehearsing, and recitations.
Some Vanderbilt courses may have requirements which exceed
this definition. Certain courses (e.g., dissertation research,
ensemble, performance instruction, and independent study) are
designated as repeatable as they contain evolving or iteratively
new content. These courses may be taken multiple times for
credit. If a course can be repeated, the number of credits allowable per semester will be included in the course description.
Temporary Grades
Temporary grades are placeholders that are assigned under
defined circumstances with a specified deadline by which
they will be replaced with a permanent grade. A student who
receives a temporary grade is ineligible for the Dean’s List.
Students may not graduate with temporary grades still remaining on their academic records.

I: Incomplete
An Incomplete is given only under extenuating circumstances
and only when a significant body of satisfactory work has been
completed in a course. The I is not intended as a replacement
for a failing grade, nor should it be given to a student who
misses the final examination. The M grade is used for the latter
purpose. The request for an Incomplete is initiated by the
student and must be approved by the instructor. In assigning
the grade of I, the instructor specifies (a) a default grade that
counts the missing work as zero and (b) a deadline by which the
missing work must be submitted. That deadline must be no later
than the last class day of the next regular semester in residence.
The Incomplete can be extended beyond the next semester only
if the student’s associate dean determines that an extension is
warranted. If the required work is submitted by the deadline
for removing the Incomplete, the I will be replaced by the grade
earned. If the work is not completed by the deadline, the default
grade will become the permanent grade for the course.
The Incomplete is not calculated in the GPA, but a student
who receives an Incomplete is ineligible for the Dean’s List.

M: Missing a Final Examination
The grade M is given to a student who misses a final examination,
provided the student could pass the course if the final examination is successfully completed. The grade of F is given if the
student could not pass the course even with the final examination.
It is the student’s responsibility to contact the Dean’s Office
before the first day of the next semester, regardless of whether
the student will be in residence that semester, to request permission to take a makeup examination. If a request has not been
submitted by the proper time, or if the student fails to take the
makeup examination within the prescribed time, the M grade
will be replaced by an F.

MI: Missing a Final Examination and Other Work
The grade MI is assigned to a student who misses the final
examination and whose work is incomplete in other respects.
The MI may not be turned in without prior authorization by
the dean. It is the student’s responsibility to contact the Dean’s
Office to request permission to take a makeup examination
and to arrange for submission of the missing work.

P

372

Withdrawal
The symbol W (withdrawal) is assigned in lieu of a grade when
a student formally withdraws from a class before the published
mid-semester deadline. After that point, withdrawal will result
in an F. A student who withdraws from school for reasons such
as illness, unusual personal or family problems, and the like,
may petition the Dean’s Office for an authorized administrative
withdrawal. If approved, the student will receive the grade W
for courses in progress. A student who withdraws from school
without an authorized administrative withdrawal receives the
grade W or F depending upon the date of withdrawal. The grade
W is not included in the calculation of the grade point average.
Dead Week
Because Peabody classes integrate theory and practice,
many courses include significant semester-long group and
individual projects that culminate in papers, presentations,
simulations, or other activities at the end of the semester.
Therefore, while instructors are discouraged from scheduling
quizzes, tests, or short-term assignments for the last week of
the semester, Peabody’s “dead week” policy does not prohibit
assignments during the week before finals.
Repeat Courses
If a course is repeated, only the last grade and credit hours
earned will be used to calculate the grade point average and be
creditable toward graduation. However, the original grade will
appear on the transcript. Certain courses (e.g., special topics
courses, directed study courses; see duplicate content section,
below) may be repeated for credit when there is no duplication
of content. Such courses may be repeated to replace a grade
only when the content of the original and repeated courses is
the same. Courses must be repeated in a graded status. This
policy also applies to Advanced Placement credit.
Duplication of Course Content
It is the responsibility of the individual student to avoid
duplication in whole or in part of the content of any courses
offered toward the degree. Such duplication may result in the
withdrawal of credit. This policy also applies to Advanced
Placement credit.
Certain courses (e.g., ensemble, performance instruction,
special topics, and directed study) are designated as repeatable as they contain evolving or iteratively new content. These
courses may be taken multiple times for credit. If a course
can be repeated, the number of credits allowable per semester
should not exceed 3 credit hours without permission.
Normal Course Load
Each semester, regular tuition is charged on the basis of a normal
course load of 12 to 18 semester hours. No more than 18 or
fewer than 12 hours may be taken in any one semester without
authorization from the dean of Peabody Student Affairs. There
is an extra charge for more than 18 hours at the current hourly
rate (contact Student Accounts). Students permitted to take
fewer than 12 hours are either placed on academic probation
or issued an academic warning, unless their light load is necessary because of health, family or outside employment. The one
exception to this policy is that seniors who have fewer than 12
hours required for the completion of their degree, beyond the
hours associated with the HOD internship or student teaching

vanderbilt university

if they are to be taken in the final semester, can take fewer than
12 hours in one of their last two semesters (e.g., a semester in
which an internship or student teaching is not being taken)
without penalty or requiring special permission.
Class Standing
To qualify for sophomore standing, a freshman must earn
at least 24 hours with a grade point average of at least 1.800
and have completed two regular semesters. A freshman who
fails to achieve sophomore standing at the end of two regular
semesters is placed on probation and has one additional
semester in which to qualify for sophomore standing. This
additional semester must be the summer session at Vanderbilt.
Normally, students who fail to qualify for sophomore standing
in the third semester are dropped from the university.
A student qualifies for junior standing by earning 54
hours with a grade point average of at least 1.900 and having
completed four regular semesters. Students who fail to qualify
for junior standing at the end of two semesters after qualifying
for sophomore standing are placed on probation and must
qualify in an additional semester. This third semester must be
the summer session at Vanderbilt. Normally, students who do
not qualify for junior standing in this additional semester will
be dropped from the university.
A student qualifies for senior standing by earning 84 hours
with a grade point average of at least 2.000 and having completed six regular semesters. A student who fails to qualify for
senior standing within two semesters of qualifying for junior
standing will be placed on probation and must qualify in one
additional semester. This additional semester must be the
summer session at Vanderbilt. Normally, students who do not
qualify for senior standing in this additional semester will be
dropped from the university.
Alternate Track
Occasionally students find that it will be necessary to reduce
their normal load due to medical reasons, varsity athletics, or
other circumstances. The result is that they will accomplish the
bachelor of science degree in nine or ten semesters instead of
eight. In such cases, the student may request Alternate Track
status. After discussing this option with their parents and
faculty adviser, students petition the dean for permission. This
normally takes place during the sophomore year. Additional
information is available in the Office of Peabody Student Affairs.
Progress Evaluation
Students enrolled in Peabody College are expected to satisfy
most Liberal Education Core requirements during the freshman and sophomore years. Although legitimate circumstances
sometimes force the postponement of Liberal Education Core
requirements, upper-level students are not expected to have
a significant number of Liberal Education Core requirements
outstanding. A student who, in the opinion of the faculty
adviser, the department chair, or the dean, is not making
satisfactory progress toward meeting Liberal Education Core
or other degree requirements may be reported to the Undergraduate Administrative Committee and is subject to being
placed on academic probation by that committee. Students
placed on academic probation for failure to make satisfactory
progress toward a degree must remove the deficiency in the
manner specified by the Administrative Committee.

Peabody College / A cademic R egulations

Academic Probation and Dismissal
After achieving sophomore standing, the student may not
be on academic probation for more than two semesters. A
student whose academic record warrants a third semester
of probation normally will be dropped from the university.
Students will be placed on academic probation, or may receive
an academic warning, if any of the following conditions apply:

Freshmen
1. The student’s cumulative grade point average falls below
1.800. Probation is removed (assuming there is no other
reason for the probation) when the student’s grade point
average is raised to 1.800 or above.
2. The student fails to earn at least 12 hours in a regular semester as a freshman. Probation is removed when the student
earns at least 12 hours in a subsequent semester and/or is
judged to be making satisfactory academic progress.
3. The student fails to achieve sophomore standing in the
required two semesters. Probation is removed when the
student achieves sophomore standing.
4. Freshmen who pass fewer than two regular courses in their
first regular semester or who earn a grade point average
lower than 1.000 have so seriously compromised their
academic standing that they may be required to take an
academic probationary leave of absence during the spring
semester.

Sophomores
1. The student’s cumulative grade point average falls below
1.800. Probation is removed (assuming there is no other
reason for the probation) when the student’s grade point
average is raised to 1.800 or above, except that at the end
of the second regular semester the student must qualify for
junior standing.
2. The student fails to earn at least 12 hours in a regular
semester as a sophomore. Probation is removed when the
student earns at least 12 hours in a subsequent semester
and/or is judged to be making satisfactory academic
progress.
3. The student is placed on probation by the Undergraduate
Administrative Committee for failure to make satisfactory
progress toward the degree. Probation is removed when the
specified conditions are met.
4. The student fails to achieve junior standing in the required
two semesters after achieving sophomore standing. Probation is removed when junior standing is achieved.

Juniors
1. The student’s cumulative grade point average falls below
1.900. Probation is removed (assuming there is no other
reason for the probation) when the grade point average is
raised to 1.900 or above, except that at the end of the second
regular semester the student must qualify for senior standing.

373

2. The student fails to earn at least 12 hours in a regular
semester as a junior. Probation is removed when the student earns at least 12 hours in a subsequent semester and/or
is judged to be making satisfactory academic progress.
3. The student is placed on probation by the Undergraduate
Administrative Committee for failure to make satisfactory
progress toward the degree. Probation is removed when the
specified conditions are met.
4. The student fails to achieve senior standing in the required
two semesters after achieving junior standing. Probation is
removed when senior standing is achieved.

Seniors
1. The student’s cumulative grade point average falls below
2.000. Probation is removed when the grade point average
is raised to 2.000 or above.
2. The student fails to earn at least 12 hours in a regular
semester as a senior, unless the semester is one in which
the student needs fewer than 12 hours in order to complete
the requirements for graduation (see section on Course
Load, above). Probation is removed when the student
earns at least 12 hours in a subsequent semester and/or is
judged to be making satisfactory academic progress and/or
completes the requirements for graduation.

Sudden Academic Insufficiency
Any student who fails by a wide margin to reach prescribed
levels of academic achievement, either at the end of a semester
or at mid-semester, or who has been placed on probation more
than once is reviewed by the Peabody Undergraduate Administrative Committee. The Committee considers each case
within the general guidelines for maintenance of satisfactory
academic standing and may take any of several actions, among
which are the following:
• The student may be placed on probation or be issued an
academic warning;
• The student may be advised to take a leave of absence or
to withdraw from the university;
• The student may be required to take an academic probationary leave of absence.
• The student may be dismissed from the university.
Under certain circumstances, a student who has been formally dismissed may be readmitted to Peabody. The Peabody
Undergraduate Administrative Committee must review and
approve any request for readmission.
Appeal and Petition Process for Undergraduate
Academic Matters
The procedures of the appeal process pertaining to academic
matters within Peabody College are listed below. Please see the
chapter “Student Accountability” in the Vanderbilt University
Student Handbook for a description of the appeal process for
non-academic matters.

P

374

Petitions for exceptions to academic policies, appeals of
academic policy implementations by Peabody Dean’s Office
staff, and appeals of academic actions by the Undergraduate Administrative Committee (UAC) Chair (e.g., letters of
dismissal) may be directed to the full UAC.
Petitions and appeals should be sent to:
Chair, Peabody Undergraduate Administrative 		
			Committee
c/o Peabody Dean’s Office
202 Peabody Administration Building
PMB 0329
230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203-5721
Fax: (615) 322-8501
A student may ask the UAC to reconsider a decision if the
student has new information to offer. The chair of the UAC will
decide whether the full UAC will reconsider. Requests for reconsideration of UAC decisions should be sent to the above address.
A final, negative decision of the UAC may be appealed to the
dean of Peabody College (at the above address), who may assign
an associate dean to handle the matter on the dean’s behalf. The
dean or associate dean will consult with the UAC and other
relevant faculty or staff as part of the review of the decision.
Further appeals beyond Peabody College should be directed
to the Provost’s Office.
Student Leave of Absence
A student desiring a leave of absence should obtain the
appropriate forms from the Office of Undergraduate Student
Affairs. All students are eligible, provided they have not been
dropped by the university and are not dropped at the end of
the semester during which application is made.
Leaves are granted for one or two semesters. Applications
should be completed before the end of the fall semester for
a leave of absence during the spring semester and before 15
August for a leave of absence during the fall semester (or for
the academic year). If the leave is approved, the student must
keep the Dean’s Office informed of any change of address
while on leave.
Should a student seek to transfer to Vanderbilt credit
earned elsewhere while on a leave of absence, it is mandatory
that permission be obtained in advance from the Dean’s Office.
Petitions for leaves of this type must be filed at least one
month before the close of the preceding semester.
While the student is on leave, registration information
will be emailed to his or her Vanderbilt email address. A
student failing to register at the conclusion of the stated leave
will be withdrawn from the university and must apply for
readmission.
Students who wish to participate in a non-Vanderbilt
program in the United States, abroad, or at sea should apply
for a leave of absence for the relevant semester. To qualify for
such a leave, a student must be in good standing at Vanderbilt with at least a 2.700 grade point average as of the date of
application. Students must obtain prior approval for the leave
of absence and for the credits to be taken in other programs if
the credits are to be transferred to Vanderbilt. Final approval
of leaves of absence always rests with the Dean’s Office. See the
section on Transfer Credit in this chapter.

vanderbilt university

Security Clearance Requirement
As of the start of fall semester 2017, all students matriculating into
Peabody College must have security clearance. In addition, all
students from any Vanderbilt school must have security clearance
if they take any Peabody course involving interaction with minors
or other vulnerable populations, or if they engage in Peabody
research or Peabody programs/related activities that require security clearance. Obtaining this security clearance involves being fingerprinted through an external agency for a criminal background
check by the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. Students are responsible for paying the
fees for this process. Students must complete the fingerprinting
that starts the clearance process no later than the end of the first
two weeks of the semester in which the fingerprinting becomes
required. Detailed instructions for completing the security clearance process can be found on the Peabody Background Clearance
Office website: peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/bco/index.php.
Vanderbilt students may not participate in any Peabody Collegerelated activities involving PreK-12 students or vulnerable adults
until their background clearance is finalized at Peabody.
Withdrawal from the University
Students proposing to withdraw from the university during
any semester must report to the Peabody Office of Undergraduate Student Affairs to initiate proper clearance procedures. Students are graded on the same basis as if withdrawing
from a course. Students who withdraw before the end of the
eighth week of classes receive a partial refund of tuition (see
the section on Financial Information). Students intending
to withdraw from the university for the following semester
should notify the Peabody Office of Undergraduate Student
Affairs by 1 December for spring semester or by 1 May for the
fall semester.
Students who have withdrawn from the university without
filing a Leave of Absence form must apply for readmission if
they wish to return.
Graduation
Degree candidates must have completed satisfactorily all
curriculum requirements, have passed all prescribed examinations, and be free of indebtedness to the university. Graduation
requirements vary with the student’s program of study but
include a minimum of 120 hours (at least 60 of which must have
been earned at Vanderbilt) and a minimum cumulative grade
point average of 2.000. A degree candidate must also have a 2.0
cumulative grade point average in his or her major.
Commencement. The university holds its annual Commencement ceremony following the spring semester. A
student completing degree requirements will be officially graduated, however, at the close of the semester or summer session
in which the degree is earned, with such graduation recorded
on the student’s permanent record. Students who graduate at
the close of the summer session or the fall semester preceding
the spring commencement ceremony are encouraged to join
spring graduates in the graduation ceremony in May. Those
unable to do so may receive their diplomas by mail.

Peabody College / S pecial Programs

375

Special Programs
Peabody Scholars Program
First-year students who achieve academic distinction during their
first semester at Vanderbilt are invited to apply to the Peabody
Scholars Program. The Peabody Scholars Honors Program was
established to offer particularly promising undergraduates at
Peabody College opportunities for holistic flourishing through
intellectual adventure, community service, and research.
Emphasizing a theme of personal, professional, and civic
creativity, the program is designed to foster full blooming
of students’ potential by offering breadth through exposing
students to a variety of academic and social experiences in different domains and depth by engaging in service-learning and
independent research.
To graduate with honors through Peabody Scholars, scholars
need to earn 24 points within the program. Scholars earn points
from a series of required components as well as optional enrichment programming. All freshman Peabody Scholars participate
in a 3-credit-hour seminar on creativity during the spring
semester. In the sophomore year, scholars work together on a
meaningful immersive service project in the local community.
Each Peabody Scholar is offered a summer stipend (between
sophomore and junior years) to support engagement in an
individual service-learning project (either domestic or abroad).
In the junior year, scholars engage in independent research
projects with a Peabody professor. Senior scholars participate in
monthly scholarly and cultural events and have the opportunity
to work on capstone projects related to their fields of study. The
Peabody Scholars Program also offers professional development, networking, mentoring, and more. The full list of current
programming is available on the program website. In sum, the
Peabody Scholars Program offers a rich array of enrichment
experiences and opportunities.
Peabody freshmen may apply for the Peabody Scholars
Program in the fall of their first semester at Vanderbilt. Selections will be made prior to the beginning of the spring semester. To be accepted into the program, students must have a

first-semester GPA of 3.6. To remain in good standing in the
program, students must maintain a minimum grade point
average of 3.0. Further information on the Peabody Scholars
Program may be obtained from Professor Leslie Kirby in the
Department of Human and Organizational Development.

Post-Baccalaureate Program with
School of Nursing
Students at Peabody College may complete the B.S. degree
with a major in human and organizational development or
child development and also earn the master of science in
nursing (M.S.N.) through a senior-in-absentia program in
the School of Nursing. Students must complete the first three
years of study as Peabody undergraduate students. During this
time students pursue the major and the core courses in the
health and human services track. Application for admission
to the School of Nursing is completed by November 1 of the
student’s junior year. Admitted students begin taking professional nursing courses in the fall of their senior year. Students
must have successfully completed a minimum of 91 hours of
undergraduate course work and all human and organizational
development major and Liberal Education Core requirements
before officially being enrolled as students in the School of
Nursing. Upon successful completion of a minimum of 31
hours of nursing course work during the senior year, students
are awarded the B.S. degree. Students continue full time in the
professional program in the School of Nursing for the next
summer, fall, spring, and summer sessions to earn the M.S.N.
degree. Students who receive the M.S.N. degree are qualified
for all professional nursing careers and are eligible to apply to
the National Council on Licensure Examination to become
Registered Nurses.
A sample curriculum is given below.

Sample Curriculum Plan

Human and Organizational Development Major/Nursing
		
FRESHMAN YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

HOD 1250
HOD 1251
HOD 1300
HOD 1301
Math

3
1
3
6
3
___
16

Applied Human Development
Intrapersonal Development
Small Group Behavior
Interpersonal Development
Mathematics Course
Statistics Course
Philosophy
Philosophy Course
Liberal Education Core
Psychology 1250
Developmental Psychology
		
		

3
1
3
3
6
___
16

P

376

vanderbilt university

		
SOPHOMORE YEAR		

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

HOD 2100
HOD 2400
HOD 2500
Econ 1010
HOD 2700
NURS 1500

Understanding Organizations
Talent Management and Organizational Fit
Systematic Inquiry I
Economics
Public Policy
Introduction to Microbiology
Liberal Education Core
		
		
JUNIOR YEAR*

3
3
3
6
___
15

3
3
4
6
___
16

HOD Courses
HOD Courses
NURS 3101
NURS 3102
NURS 1601

3
3
4
2
3
___
15

6
3
4
3				
___
16

HOD Health and Human Services Track Required Courses
HOD Track Electives
Human Anatomy and Physiology
Human Anatomy and Physiology
Introduction to Nutrition
Liberal Education Core
		
		
*Students apply for admission to the School of Nursing during the fall semester of their junior year.

SENIOR YEAR
		
FALL SEMESTER
NURS 5101
Legal and Ethical Accountability in Professional Nursing Practice
NURS 5102
Principles of Client-Centered Care
NURS 5105
Enhancement of Community and Population Health I
NURS 5103
Human Experience of Health and Illness Across the Lifespan I
NURS 5115
Fundamentals of Clinical Practice*
NURS 5106
Pharmacology for Nursing Care I
		
		
SPRING SEMESTER
NURS 5201
Inquiry and Evidence in Professional Nursing Practice
NURS 5205
Enhancement of Community and Population Health II
NURS 5203
Human Experience of Health and Illness Across the Lifespan II
Integration of Theoretical and Clinical Aspects of Nursing I*
NURS 5215
NURS 5206
Pharmacology for Nursing Care II
		
		

Hours
2
1
2
4
5
2
___
16
2
3
5
3
2
___
15

*Acceptable as undergraduate Human and Organizational Development internship requirement.

B.S. in human and organizational development conferred at the end of the spring semester. Refer to the School of Nursing
Catalog for requirements for completion of the M.S.N.

Peabody College / Interdisciplinary Majors

377

Interdisciplinary Majors

P

EABODY College, in conjunction with the College of
Arts and Science, offers four interdisciplinary majors.
These majors are to be taken as second majors only
and are constructed around academic disciplines particularly
appropriate for future teachers (except secondary), but are not
limited to students entering teacher education. The interdisciplinary major consists of 36 hours of study and draws upon the
academic resources of a number of departments throughout
the University. Students follow the Liberal Education Core
requirements of their first major.

EARTH AND SPACE SCIENCES.
3-4 hours from:
ASTR 1010 and1010L, Introductory Astronomy: Stars and Galaxies; EES
1510 and 1510L, The Dynamic Earth; EES 1030 and 1030L, Oceanography; EES 1080, Earth and Atmosphere; EES 1140, Ecology,
Evolution, and Climate through Time

NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

CALCULUS.
8-9 hours from:
MATH 1200, 1201, and 2200, Single-Variable Calculus I, II, and III;
MATH 1300 and 1301, Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus I and II

Language and Literacy Studies (36 hours)
COMMUNICATIONS.
6 hours from:
CMST 1500, Fundamentals of Public Speaking; CMST 1850 Interpersonal Communications
ENGLISH.
9 hours from:
ENGL1230W, 1270W or 1260W and 1250W and 3210 and above
EDUCATION.
9 hours from:
ENED 2100, 2200 or 4963 (3 hours); ENED 2430, ENED 3310 (3 hours);
SPED 2430 or PSY-PC 3150 (3 hours)
ADDITIONAL COURSES
12 hours from two areas:
ANTH 1601, Introduction to Language and Culture; ANTH 2601, Introduction to Linguistics; ANTH 2602, Anthropological Linguistics; ANTH
2603 Comparative Writing Systems; CMST 2800, Rhetoric of Civic
Life; CMST 3000, Rhetoric of American Experience, 1640-1865;
CMST 3001, Rhetoric of American Experience, 1865-1945; CMST
2900, Values of Modern Communication; CMST 3002, Rhetoric of the
American Experience 1945-Present; CMST 2950, Rhetoric of Mass
Media; PHIL1003, General Logic; PSCI 2242, Political Communication; THTR 1010, Fundamentals of Theatre

Mathematics and Science Studies (35–37 hours)
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES.
4 hours from:
BSCI 1100 and 1100L, Biology Today; BSCI 1105, Human Biology;
BSCI 1510 and 1510L, or BSCI 1511 and 1511L, Introduction to
Biological Sciences; BSCI 1103, Green Earth, the Biodiversity and
Evolution of Green Plants
CHEMISTRY.
4 hours from:
CHEM1010L and 1010, or CHEM 1020L and 1020, Introductory Chemistry; CHEM 1601 and 1601L, or CHEM 1602 and 1602L, General
Chemistry
PHYSICS.
4 hours from:
PHYS 1010 and 1010L, Introductory Physics; PHYS 1601 and 1601L or
1602 and 1602L, General Physics

HISTORY/ PHIILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE.
3 hours from:
ASTR 2130, Theories of the Universe; HIST 2800, Modern Medicine;
PHIL 3616, Philosophy and the Natural Sciences

PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS.
3 hours from:
MATH 2820 Introduction to Probability and Mathematics Statistics;
MATH 3700, Discrete Mathematics; PSY-PC 2110 Introduction to
Statistical Analysis
GEOMETRY.
3 hours from:
MATH 3200, Introduction to Topology; MATH 3210, Transformation
Geometry; MATH 3310, Introduction to Mathematical Logic
ALGEBRA
3 hours from:
MATH 2410, Methods of Linear Algebra; MATH 2600, Linear Algebra;
MATH 3300, Abstract Algebra

Natural Science Studies (35–36 hours)
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES.
8 hours from:
BSCI 1100/1100L, Biology Today; BSCI 1105, Human Biology; BSCI
1510 and 1510L, and/or 1151 and 1151L, Introduction to Biological
Sciences; BSCI 1103, Green Earth, the Biodiversity and Evolution of
Green Plants
CHEMISTRY.
8 hours from:
CHEM 1010L and 1010 and/or 1020L/1020, Introductory Chemistry;
CHEM 1601 and 1601L and/or 1602 and 1602L, General Chemistry
PHYSICS.
4 hours from:
PHYS 1010 and1010L, Introductory Physics; PHYS 1601/1601L or
1602 and 1602L, General Physics
EARTH AND SPACE SCIENCES.
3-4 hours from:
ASTR 1010/1010L Introductory Astronomy: Stars and Galaxies; EES
1510 and 1510L, The Dynamic Earth; EES 1030 and 1030L, Oceanography; EES 1080 Earth and Atmosphere; EES 1140, Ecology,
Evolution, and Climate through Time
HISTORY/ PHIILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE.
3 hours from:
ASTR 2130, Theories of the Universe; HIST 2800, Modern Medicine;
PHIL 3613, Philosophy and the Natural Sciences
ELECTIVES.
9 hours (3 additional courses) in:
Astronomy, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Earth and Environmental Sciences, Physics, or History and Philosophy

P

378

Second Language Studies (36 hours)
EDUCATION.
9 hours from:
EDUC 3730, ELL Educational Foundations; EDUC 3750, Linguistics and
Language Acquisition for ELL Teachers; ENGL 1260W, Introduction
to Literary and Cultural Analysis
PSYCHOLOGY.
3 hours from:
PSY-PC 1250, Developmental Psychology; PSY-PC 2600, Educational
Psychology

vanderbilt university
Additional four courses (12 hours) of United States History courses from:
HIST 1390-1440, 1660, 1690, 1720, 1730, 2580, 2590, 2610-2650,
2690-2722
Six courses (18 hours) drawn from at least three areas: Anthropology,
Economics, Political Science, and Sociology
European History
6 hours from:
HIST 1350, History of Western Civilization to 1700; HIST 1360, History of
Western Civilization since 1700

LINGUISTICS.
3 hours from:
ANTH 1101, Introduction to Linguistics; ENED 2430, Fostering Language
in Diverse Classrooms; SPED 2430, Introduction to Language and
Communication

Additional four courses on European History from:
HIST 1600, 2130 2135, 2220-2410

FOREIGN LANGUAGE.
12 hours of language courses from:
Arabic, Chinese, French, German, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese,
Russian, or Spanish

American Politics
3 hours from:
PSCI 1100, Intro. to American Government and Politics

ELECTIVES.
9 hours of elective courses are to be selected to reflect a concentration
within a specific foreign language. Students MUST consult with their
advisers when selecting elective hours.

Any five (15 hours) of the following PSCI courses: 2204, 2222, 22402246, 2248, 2251, 2255, 2256, 2259, 2262, 3247, 3249, 3250,
3252-3254, 3258, 3260, 4275

For elementary or early childhood majors seeking an added endorsement
in ELL, in addition to the above major requirements, the following
9 hours are required: EDUC 3740, ELL Methods and Materials (3
hours); EDUC 3760, Assessment of ELL (3 hours); EDUC 3731, 3742,
and 3763, Practicum for ELL (3 hours)

Social Studies (36 hours)
Students selecting an interdisciplinary major in social studies will have
seven options available to them. Each option requires 18 hours of study
focused on a single social science discipline that is supplemented with 18
hours of course work drawn from studies within other social sciences. The
seven options available to students include a focus on any of the following
areas of study: Anthropology, Economics, American History, European
History, American Politics, World Politics, or Sociology.
Anthropology
9 hours from:
ANTH 1101, Introduction to Anthropology; ANTH 1201 Introduction to
Archaeology; ANTH 1301, Introduction to Biological Anthropology
9 hours in specified courses:
A Comparative Anthropology and Anthropological Theory Course (3
hours)
An Archaeology and Physical Anthropology Course (3 hours)
An Ethnography, Ethnohistory, and Linguistics Course (3 hours)
Six courses (18 hours) drawn from at least three areas: Economics, History, Political Science, and Sociology
Economics
9 hours required from:
ECON 1010, Principles of Macroeconomics; ECON 1020, Principles of
Microeconomics; ECON1500, Economic Statistics
Additional 9 hours in Economics Courses
Six courses (18 hours) drawn from at least three areas: Anthropology,
History, Political Science, and Sociology
United States History
6 hours from:
HIST 1390, America to 1776; HIST 1400, U.S. 1776-1877; HIST 1410,
U.S. 1877-1945; HIST 1420, U.S. Post-1945

Six courses (18 hours) drawn from at least three areas: Anthropology,
Economics, Political Science, and Sociology

Six courses (18 hours) drawn from at least three areas: Anthropology,
Economics, History, and Sociology
World Politics
3 hours from:
PSCI 1101, Introduction to Comparative Politics; PSCI 1102, Introduction to International Politics
Any five (15 hours) of the following PSCI courses: 2210, 2212-2216,
2218-2227, 2230-2234, 2236, 3211, 3217, 3228, 3229, 3235
Six courses (18 hours) drawn from at least three areas: Anthropology,
Economics, History, Sociology
Sociology
6 hours from:
SOC 1010, Introduction to Sociology, or SOC 1020, Contemporary
Social Problems (3 hours); SOC 3001, Sociological Perspectives (3
hours)
4 courses (12 hours) 3 hours from each of the following areas:
A sociology course drawn from the core area of Crime, Law, and Deviance
A sociology course drawn from the core area of Organizations, Politics,
and Inequality
A sociology course drawn from the core area of Family, Medicine, and
Mental Health
A sociology course drawn from the core area of Culture and Social
Change
Six courses (18 hours) drawn from at least three areas: Anthropology,
Economics, History, and Political Science

Peabody College / Majors in Child D evelopment, Child S tudies, and Cognitive S tudies

379

Majors in Child Development, Child Studies, and
Cognitive Studies
CHAIR, DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Amy Needham
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Leigh Wadsworth
PPROFESSORS EMERITI Leonard Bickman, David S. Cordray, Kathleen
V. Hoover-Dempsey, Howard M. Sandler, James H. Steiger
PROFESSORS Amy Booth, James Booth, David Cole, Bruce Compas,
Elizabeth Dykens, Judy Garber, Daniel Levin, David Lubinski, Amy
Needham, Kristopher Preacher, John Rieser, Bethany Rittle-Johnson,
Joseph Rodgers III, Tedra Walden
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Sarah Brown-Schmidt, Sun-Joo Cho, Laura
Novick, Megan Saylor, Craig Smith, Sonya Sterba, Georgene Troseth,
Duane Watson, Bahr Weiss
ASSOCIATE CLINICAL PROFESSOR F. Joseph McLaughlin III, Nina
Martin
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Lisa Fazio, Autumn Kujawa, Jonathan Lane,
Gavin Price
ASSISTANT CLINICAL PROFESSOR Vicki Harris
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Allison Bender, Susan
Douglas, Michelle Reising
SENIOR LECTURERS Julia Noland, Leigh Wadsworth
LECTURERS Jenni Dunbar, Shane Hutton, Maria Osina

Major in Child Development
THE child development major is designed for students who
wish to study children (infancy through adolescence) and the
family, cultural, peer, school, and neighborhood contexts in
which they live. The major is designed to provide a strong
background in the social and behavioral sciences related to
child development, a focused understanding of the scientific
study of children and the contexts in which they develop, and
opportunities for supervised and independent research on
aspects of child development in ways that enable students to
link theories and prior research to research design and data
on children’s development. The major is excellent preparation
for graduate study in selected social science and professional
fields (e.g., psychology, medicine, nursing, education, public
policy) and offers an excellent complementary (or second)
major for undergraduate students simultaneously pursuing a
major in cognitive studies, elementary education, human and
organizational development, or special education.
The child development curriculum is designed to ensure
that students develop a background in the liberal arts and
sciences; a clear understanding of the theories, major research
findings, and research methods central to the field of child
development; and an area of focus or expertise in child development. Development of background in the liberal arts and
sciences occurs within the context of the Liberal Education
Core, composed of required and elective courses in communications, humanities, mathematics, natural sciences, and social
sciences. A clear understanding of theory and research central
to the field is developed through the major core courses. These
include an overview of child development, courses focused
on the domains of psychological processes central to human
development (cognition; social and personality development),
courses related to major epochs of child development (infancy
and adolescence), and courses devoted to the major research
methodologies in the field (experimental, observational,
psychometric). Students select an area of concentration (major
elective area) to complement the field as a whole.

Honors Program
The Honors Program in child development offers qualified majors the opportunity to conduct individual research
projects in collaboration with faculty members. This research
experience culminates in the writing and public presentation
of a senior thesis. Students who major in child development
are eligible to apply for the Honors Program at the end of their
sophomore year if they have an overall grade point average of
at least 3.2 and at least a 3.2 in child development courses.
Students who complete the program successfully and who
have a final grade point average of at least 3.2 will receive
Honors or Highest Honors in child development. The program should substantially aid those intending to do graduate
work. More specific information concerning admission to and
the requirements of the Honors Program is available from the
director of the Honors Program, the director of undergraduate
studies, or the department education coordinator.
Curriculum
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Students take a minimum of 120 hours, distributed as follows:

Liberal Education Core Requirements. Minimum 40 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Cultural
Studies, Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill
these areas are located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook
(http://peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28
on the writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27
or above and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete
English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully
complete one writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writingintensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses)
or end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation,
all students must successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-year Seminars when open
registration begins.

Major Requirements. 30 hours.
Students take a minimum of 30 hours in child development. The core
consists of seven courses (21 hours) in developmental areas, epochs, and
methods, and a minimum of three additional courses (9 hours) in an elective area of specialization.

P

380

Major Core. 21 hours.
PSY-PC 1250. Developmental Psychology
PSY-PC 2250. Cognitive Aspects of Human Development
PSY-PC 2400. Social and Personality Development
PSY-PC 2120. Statistical Analysis
One of the following two courses:
PSY-PC 2500. Infancy
PSY-PC 2550. Adolescent Development
Two of the following courses:
PSY-PC 2170. Experimental Methods, or
Psy 2150. Principles of Experimental Design
PSY-PC 3722. Psychometric Methods
PSY-PC 3860, 3980, 3981, 4998, 4999; Psy 3840, 3980, 4998, 4999.
Directed Research or Honors Research (Only 3 hours of either Directed
Research or Honors Research can be applied to this requirement.)

Major Elective Area. A minimum of 9 hours.
Any course in the Department of Psychology and Human Development
(Peabody) or the Department of Psychology (A&S) that is not being used to
meet another psychology requirement can be used as an elective (except,
Psy 1200, Psy 2100, PSY-PC 1205/1207, 2110, 3870).
Additionally, the following courses may serve as electives. With the approval
of the adviser, program director, or director of undergraduate studies, other
courses may also be used as part of the child development elective area.
Education 3120. Children in Families and Schools
Education 3140. Learning and Development in Early Childhood Education
English Education 2430. Fostering Language in Classrooms
English Education 2100. Literature and Drama for Young Children
English Education 2200. Exploring Literature for Children
HODC 3232. Ethics for Human Development Professionals
HODC 3342. Introduction to Community Psychology
Neuroscience 2201. Neuroscience
Neuroscience 3269. Developmental Neuroscience
Philosophy 3617. Philosophy of Language
PSY-PC 3850.* Independent Study
PSY-PC 3860.* Directed Research
PSY-PC 3980 or Psychology 3980, 3981, 4998, 4999* Honors Research
SPED 2120. Family Interventions
SPED 2160. Cultural Diversity in American Education
SPEDH 3348. Language and Learning
SPEDS 2430. Introduction to Language and Communication

NOTE: Research/experiential courses marked * above may be repeated freely for
elective credit toward graduation. However, only a total of 6 hours from among
these courses, in any combination, may be used as elective credit within the major.

Second Major or Electives. 50 hours (or less if additional
hours are earned in the Liberal Education Core, Major Core,
or Major Elective Area).

vanderbilt university

The Five-year Child Development/Nursing Program
The Five-year Child Development/Nursing program combines
the undergraduate major degree in child development with the
requirements of the Master of Science in Nursing program in
the School of Nursing. The prerequisites for admission to the
Five-year Child Development/Nursing program are completed
within the first three years of the undergraduate program;
these include all requirements of the child development major
and all prerequisites for admission to the Master of Science in
Nursing (M.S.N.) program. Application to the M.S.N. program in the School of Nursing is made by December of the
junior year, and admissions decisions are made during the
spring that follows. If admitted to the program, the student
takes all senior year courses in the School of Nursing. The
bachelor of science degree in child development is awarded
after the completion of the senior year (and a minimum of 120
credit hours). The student continues in the Nursing program
during the summer immediately following graduation and
continues through the fifth year as a student in the School of
Nursing. The master of science in nursing is awarded upon
completion of all Nursing program requirements, usually at
the end of the fifth year of study.

Peabody College / Majors in Child D evelopment, Child S tudies, and Cognitive S tudies

Sample Curriculum Plan: Child Development Major/Nursing

381

					
FRESHMAN YEAR
30 hours

Semester hours
FALL
SPRING

PSY-PC 1250
PSY-PC 2250
PSY-PC 2400

3
12
___
15

Developmental Psychology
Cognitive Aspects of Human Development
Social and Personality Development
Liberal Education Core
		
		

3
3
9
___
15

SOPHOMORE YEAR

32 hours		

PSY-PC 2110
Psy 2100
PSY-PC 2120
NURS 1500

Statistics*, or

3

-

Statistics
Introduction to Microbiology**

-

3
4

One of the following:		
PSY-PC 2500
Infancy
PSY-PC 2550
Adolescent Development

3

-

One of the following:		
PSY-PC 2170
Experimental Methods
PSY-PC 3722
Psychometric Methods
PSY-PC 3860
Directed Research
Liberal Education Core
		
		

-

3

10
___
16

6
___
16

4
-

4
2

3

-

6
3
___
16

3
6
___
15

Application to the Nursing program: Middle of the junior year
JUNIOR YEAR

31 hours

NURS 3101
NURS 3102
NURS 1601

Anatomy and Physiology I**
Anatomy and Physiology II**
Nutrition

One of the following:		
PSY-PC 2170
Experimental Methods
PSY-PC 3722
Psychometric Methods
PSY-PC 3860
Directed Research
Child Development major elective area
Liberal Education Core/Electives
		
		

*Child development major prerequisite and meets Liberal Education Core requirement.
**Meets Five-year Nursing Program requirement and Liberal Education Core requirement.

P

382

vanderbilt university

Pre-Specialty Five-year Curriculum
Sample Curriculum Plan (Continued)
Required Nursing Courses (31 hours):
(Senior Year taken while enrolled in the School of Nursing—Admission Required)
FALL
NURS
NURS
NURS
NURS
NURS
NURS

5101
5102
5105
5103
5115
5106

SPRING
NURS 5201
NURS 5205
NURS 5203
NURS 5215
NURS 5206

Legal and Ethical Accountability in Professional Nursing Practice [2]
Principles of Client-Centered Care [1]
Enhancement of Community and Population Health I [2]
Human Experience of Health and Illness Across the Lifespan I [4]
Fundamentals of Clinical Practice [5]
Pharmacology for Nursing Care I [2]

Inquiry and Evidence in Professional Nursing Practice [2]
Enhancement of Community and Population Health II [3]
Human Experience of Health and Illness Across the Lifespan II [5]
Integration of Theoretical and Clinical Aspects of Nursing I [3]
Pharmacology for Nursing Care II [2]

FIFTH YEAR IN PRE-SPECIALTY
Refer to the School of Nursing Catalog for requirements for completion of the M.S.N. degree.

Peabody College / Majors in Child D evelopment, Child S tudies, and Cognitive S tudies

Major in Child Studies
PEABODY has long had great strength in the area of child
studies. The 36-hour interdisciplinary major in child studies
draws on courses from psychology, education, special education, and human and organizational development. The major is
excellent pre-professional preparation for students interested in
graduate school in psychology or education, in law (e.g., child
and family advocacy), or in various health related areas (e.g.,
medicine, nursing) involving children. It is also appropriate for
students who are interested in gaining a broader understanding
of children and families in contemporary society. The major
areas covered are: developmental psychology; learning; research
methods; language and literacy; and families, community, and
diversity.
Honors Program
The Honors Program in child studies offers qualified majors
the opportunity to conduct individual research projects in
collaboration with faculty members. This research experience
culminates in the writing and public presentation of a senior
thesis. Students who major in child studies are eligible to apply
for the Honors Program at the end of their sophomore year if
they have an overall grade point average of at least 3.2 and a 3.2
in child studies courses. Students who complete the program
successfully and who have a final grade point average of at least
3.2 will receive Honors or Highest Honors in child studies. The
program should substantially aid those intending to do graduate
work. More specific information concerning admission to and
the requirements of the Honors Program is available from the
director of the Honors Program, the director of undergraduate
studies, or the department education coordinator.
Curriculum
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Students take a minimum of 120 hours, distributed as follows:

Liberal Education Core Requirements. Minimum 40 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Cultural
Studies, Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill
these areas are located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook
(http://peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28
on the writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27
or above and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete
English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully
complete one writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writingintensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses)
or end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation,
all students must successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-year Seminars when open
registration begins.

383

Child Studies Major Courses
DEVELOPMENT COURSES. (9 hours)
PSY-PC 1250.   Developmental Psychology
PSY-PC 2250.   Cognitive Aspects of Human Development
PSY-PC 2400.   Social and Personality Development
PSY-PC 2500.   Infancy
PSY-PC 2550.   Adolescent Development
LEARNING. (3 hours)
Mathematics Education 2100 or 2200
Science Education 2200 or Social Studies Education 2100
PSY-PC 2600.   Educational Psychology
SPED 2310.   Managing Academic and Social Behavior
RESEARCH METHODS. (3 hours)
PSY-PC 2170. Experimental Methods, or
Psy 2150. Principles of Experimental Design
PSY-PC 3722.   Psychometric Methods
PSY-PC 3724.   Psychometrics
HOD 2500.   Systematic Inquiry
FAMILIES, COMMUNITY, AND DIVERSITY. (6 hours)
EDUC 1220.   Society, School, and the Teacher
EDUC/SPED 2160.   Cultural Diversity in American Education
EDUC 3120.   Children in Families and Schools
EDUC 3620.   Social and Philosophical Aspects of Education
HODH 3221.   Health Service Delivery to Diverse Populations
HODC 3202.   Social Problems I
HODC 3342.   Introduction to Community Psychology
SPED 1210.   Introduction to Exceptionality
SPED 2120.   Family Intervention
LANGUAGE AND LITERACY. (6 hours)
ANTH 2601.   Introduction to Linguistics
EDUC 3114.   Language and Literacy Learning in Young Children
EDUC 3214.   Theory and Method of Reading Instruction in Elementary
Schools
ENED 2430.   Fostering Language in Classrooms
ENED 2100.   Literature and Drama for Young Children
ENED 2200.   Exploring Literature for Children
Philosophy 3617.   Philosophy of Language
PSY-PC 3150.   Language Development
SPEDS 2430.   Introduction to Language and Communication
SPEDH 3348.   Language and Learning
ELECTIVES IN CHILD STUDIES. (9 hours)
Any course in the Department of Psychology and Human Development
(Peabody) or the Department of Psychology (A&S) that is not being used to
meet another psychology requirement can be used as an elective (except
PSY 1200, Psy 2100, PSY-PC 1205/1207, 2110, and 3870).
Additionally, the following courses may serve as electives. With the approval
of the adviser, program director, or director of undergraduate studies, other
courses may also be used as part of the child studies elective area.
PSY-PC 3850.*   Independent Study
PSY-PC 3860.*   Readings and Research for Undergraduates
PSY-PC 3980, 3981, 4998, 4999, or Psy 3980, 3981, 4998, 4999.*
Honors Research
HOD 3232.   Ethics for Human Development Professionals
HODC 3202.   Community Development Theory
NOTE: Research/experiential courses marked * above may be repeated freely for
elective credit toward graduation. However, only a total of 6 hours from among
these courses, in any combination, may be used as elective credit within the major.

P

384

Major in Cognitive Studies
THE cognitive studies major is designed for students who wish
to become active inquirers into the processes by which people
learn to think, solve problems, and reason. The major encourages the development of flexible reasoning and problem-solving skills that are useful in a wide variety of endeavors. The
major is excellent preparation for graduate study in the social
and behavioral sciences as well as for areas (such as medicine
and law) that place importance on inquiry and clear thinking.
The curriculum is planned to ensure that students receive a
strong background in both science and the liberal arts, with an
emphasis on problem solving and complex decision making.
The courses in the core curriculum focus on various aspects of
human cognition, including communication, cognitive development, basic cognitive processes, applications of theories of
knowledge, and sociocultural aspects of learning. Students are
encouraged to consult their advisers about pursuing a second
major or developing an area of concentration that is consistent with their career plans. The major also emphasizes an
appreciation of the scientific method and the research process;
numerous opportunities exist to pursue independent study in
close collaboration with faculty members.
Leadership and success in our society will depend increasingly on one’s ability to process complex information, solve
difficult problems using systematic analysis, and facilitate the
learning of others. The knowledge and experience gained by
students in cognitive studies will allow them to be full participants in the society of learners who represent the future.
Honors Program
The Honors Program in cognitive studies offers qualified
majors the opportunity to conduct individual research
projects in collaboration with faculty members. This research
experience culminates in the writing and public presentation
of a senior thesis. Students who major in cognitive studies are
eligible to apply for the Honors Program at the end of their
sophomore year if they have an overall grade point average of
at least 3.2 and a 3.2 in cognitive studies courses. Students who
complete the program successfully and who have a final grade
point average of at least 3.2 will receive Honors or Highest
Honors in cognitive studies. The program should substantially aid those intending to do graduate work. More specific
information concerning admission to and the requirements
of the Honors Program is available from the director of the
Honors Program, the director of undergraduate studies, or the
department education coordinator.
Curriculum
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Students take a minimum of 120 hours, distributed as follows:

Liberal Education Core Requirements. Minimum 40 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Cultural
Studies, Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill
these areas are located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook
(http://peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

vanderbilt university

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned
SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28 on the
writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27 or above
and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English scores above
4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully complete one
writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writing-intensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses) or end with the
digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation, all students must
successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-year Seminars when open
registration begins..

Major Requirements. 33 hours.
Students take a minimum of 33 hours in Cognitive Studies. The core consists of four courses (12 hours), a minimum five additional courses (15 hours)
in the elective area, and two courses (6 hours) in the Methods of Inquiry area.

Major Core. 12 hours.
PSY-PC 1205.   Minds, Brains, Contexts, and Cultures
or 1207.
PSY-PC 2200.   Psychology of Thinking
or Psy 3120.   Cognitive Psychology
PSY-PC 3650.   Advanced Topical Seminar
One of the following:
PSY-PC 2170.   Experimental Methods or
Psy 2150.   Principles of Experimental Design

Major Elective Area. 15hours
Any course in the Department of Psychology and Human Development
(Peabody) or the Department of Psychology (A&S) that is not being used
to meet another psychology requirement can be used as an elective (except PSY-PC 1250, 2110, 3870, Psy 1200, Psy 2100).
Additionally, the following courses may serve as electives. With the approval
of the adviser, program director, or director of undergraduate studies, other
courses may also be used as part of the cognitive studies elective area.
ANTH 1301.   Biological Anthropology
ANTH 2601.   Introduction to Linguistics
ENED 2430. Fostering Language in Classrooms
NSC 2201. Neuroscience
PHIL 3617. Philosophy of Language
PHIL 3630. Philosophy of Mind
PSY-PC 3850.*   Independent Study
PSY-PC 3860, Psy 3840.* Directed Research
PSY-PC 3980, 3981, 4998, 4999, or Psy 3980, 3981, 4998, 4999.*
Honors Research
SPEDS 2430. Introduction to Language and Communication
NOTE: Research/experiential courses marked * above may be repeated freely for
elective credit toward graduation. However, only a total of 6 hours from among
these courses, in any combination, may be used as elective credit within the major.

Methods of Inquiry. 6 hours.
May also be used to satisfy Liberal Education Core requirements
ANTH 1301, 2211
CHEM 2100
CS 1101 or 2212
EES 3250
HOD 2500
HODC 3222
Philosophy 1003, 3003, 3616

Peabody College / Majors in Child D evelopment, Child S tudies, and Cognitive S tudies
PSY-PC 2120, 3722, 3724
PSY-PC or Psy 3980, 3981, 4998, 4999 (Only 3 hours from any of these
courses can be applied to this requirement)
SOC 3002
SPED 2310
SPEDH 3871/SPEDS 3871`

Second Major and Electives. 51­-­52 hours.

Minors
The Minor in Child Development
The minor in child development consists of 18 hours in the
following courses:
PSY-PC 1250.   Developmental Psychology		
PSY-PC 2110.   Introduction to Statistical Analysis (may be taken as part
of the Liberal Education Core)
One of the following:
PSY-PC 2250.   Cognitive Aspects of Human Development
PSY-PC 2400.   Social and Personality Development
One of the following:
PSY-PC 2500.   Infancy
PSY-PC 2550.   Adolescent Development
One of the following:
PSY-PC 2170.   Experimental Methods
Psy 2150.   Principles of Experimental Design
PSY-PC 3722.   Psychometric Methods
One child development elective course
(Any of the courses above not taken to meet a minor requirement or any
course listed as an elective for the child development major)

The Minor in Cognitive Studies
The minor in cognitive studies consists of 15 hours in the following courses:
REQUIRED COURSES. (6 hours)
PSY-PC 1205.   Minds, Brains, Contexts, and Cultures
or PSY-PC 1207.
PSY-PC 2200.   Psychology of Thinking
or Psy 3120.   Cognitive Psychology
ELECTIVE COURSES. (9 hours)
ANTH 2601.   Introduction to Linguistics
ENED 2430.   Fostering Language in the Classroom
PSY-PC 1115.   First-Year Seminar
or PSY-PC 1157.
PSY-PC 2250.   Cognitive Aspects of Human Development
PSY-PC 2300.   Social and Emotional Context of Cognition
PSY-PC 2400.   Social and Personality Development
PSY-PC 3150.   Language Development
PSY-PC 3650.   Advanced Topical Seminar (Intended for students
beyond the first year. May be repeated if no duplication of content.)
Psy 3775.   Human Memory
Psy 3635.   Health Psychology
PSY-PC 3200.   Introduction to Clinical Psychology
PSY-PC 3860, 3980, 3981,4998, 4999.   Directed Research/Honors
Research (may not be repeated for minor credit)
SPEDS 2430. Introduction to Language and Communication

385

The Minor in Quantitative Methods
Quantitative skills are highly valued in a variety of fields.
Training provided by the quantitative methods minor can
provide a competitive edge on the job market or for future
graduate study. Many advances in quantitative methods used
in the social sciences and education are not covered in standard undergraduate introductory statistics courses. This minor
exposes students to more recent developments in quantitative
methods with concrete applications to practice. The quantitative methods minor helps students become better consumers
and producers of scientific research. Students will have the
opportunity to learn from leading experts in the statistical
analysis of social science data.
Structure of the Minor
Prerequisite for the minor is completion of the introductory
statistics sequence that is already required by the undergraduate
psychology majors. This sequence is:
PSY-PC 2110: Introduction to Statistical Analysis (3 hours)
or PSY 2100: Quantitative Methods (3 hours)
And
PSY-PC 2120: Statistical Analysis (3 hours)

The quantitative methods minor is an 18-hour minor. The
18 hours include both PSY-PC-2110 (or PSY 2100) and PSY-PC
2120, and these serve as prerequisite courses for the electives.
Following completion of these prerequisite courses (6 hours;
required), the minor requires four additional courses (12 hours;
electives). Any four courses offered by the Quantitative Methods program are applicable. At most, three hours of directed
research/independent study can count toward the minor.
Students with interest in directed research/independent study
can contact individual quantitative methods faculty directly.
Courses that would satisfy the elective requiremeuts (pick 4):
PSY-PC 3722.   Psychometric Methods
PSY-PC 3724.   Psychometrics
PSY-PC 3727.   Modern Robust Statistical Methods
PSY-PC 3730.   Applied Latent Class and Mixture Modeling
PSY-PC 3732.   Latent Growth Curve Modeling
PSY-PC 3735.   Correlation and Regression
PSY-PC 3738.   Introduction to Item Response Theory
PSY-PC 3743.   Factor Analysis
PSY-PC 3746.   Multivariate Statistics
PSY-PC 3749.   Applied Nonparametric Statistics

Prior to enrolling in a specific course, please contact the instructor regarding prerequisite courses. Undergraduates may request to
be enrolled in QM graduate courses not yet cross-listed as undergraduate courses by using a substitution form, with permission of
instructor. We anticipate adding more courses to the list of electives,
which will be posted at peabody.vanderbilt.edu/departments/psych/
undergraduate_programs/quantitative_methods_minor.php
For inquiries about the quantitative methods minor, email kris.
preacher@vanderbilt.edu

P

386

vanderbilt university

Majors in Early Childhood and Elementary Education,
and Secondary Education
CHAIR, DEPARTMENT OF TEACHING AND LEARNING Deborah W. Rowe
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Catherine McTamaney
PROFESSORS EMERITI Jerold P. Bauch, Paul A. Cobb, Carolyn M.
Evertson, Dale Clark Farran, Richard Lehrer, Charles Myers, Victoria J.
Risko, Leona Schauble
PROFESSORS Douglas Clark, David K. Dickinson, Rogers Hall, Ilana
Horn, Robert Jimenez, Deborah W. Rowe
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE EMERITA Earline D. Kendall
PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Ana Christine DaSilva, Lisa Pray,
Marcy Singer-Gabella, Barbara Stengel, Anita Wager
RESEARCH PROFESSOR Kathy Ganske
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Amanda Goodwin, Melissa S. Gresalfi,
Kevin M. Leander, Jeannette Mancilla- Martinez
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Melanie Hundley, Ann
M. Neely
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Corey Brady, Nicole Joseph, Luis Leyva,
Ebony O. McGee, Tesha Sengupta-Irving
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Teresa K. Dunleavy,
Andrew Hostetler, Heather L. Johnson, Amy B. Palmeri
SENIOR LECTURER Catherine McTamaney
LECTURERS Molly Collins, Shannon Daniel, Andrea Henrie, Kristen Neal,
Emily Pendergrass, Jeanne Peter, Rebecca Peterson

Early Childhood and Elementary Education
Early Childhood Education
THE specialization in early childhood education (ECE) is a
field-oriented program designed to prepare students for work
with children in preschool programs and in primary grades
(grades PreK-3). Beginning in the freshman year, students
observe and participate in local schools and agencies and in
experimental classrooms on campus. Most Liberal Education
Core courses are taken in the College of Arts and Science.
Students must combine a specialization in early childhood
education with a second major. Course work beyond the
standard 120-hour program may be required for some double
majors.
Vanderbilt students seeking teacher licensure must apply
through the Office of Teacher Licensure at Vanderbilt and
must meet licensure requirements in effect at the time of their
graduation, which may be different from licensure requirements
in effect at the time they entered Vanderbilt. Licensure requirements are currently undergoing change. Each year, teacher
licensure candidates should consult the current Vanderbilt
Undergraduate Catalog, the Undergraduate Guide to Teacher
Licensure published by the Vanderbilt Office of Teacher Licensure, and the Undergraduate Handbook published by the Office
of Undergraduate Student Affairs.
B.S. Degree Requirements
Early Childhood Education (PreK–3 Licensure)
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Students take a minimum of 120 hours, distributed as follows:

Liberal Education Core Requirements. Minimum 60 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Cultural Studies,

Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill these areas
are located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook (http://peabody.
vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28
on the writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27
or above and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete
English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully
complete one writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writingintensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses)
or end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation,
all students must successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-year Seminars when open
registration begins.

Professional Education Core. 33 hours.
EDUC 1220, 3114, 3115, 3120, 3140, 3150, 3180, 3212; HMED 2150;
MTED 3150; SPED 1210; SPEDH 3770/3777

Field Experiences. 15hours.
EDUC 3116, 3151, 4951, 4961, MTED 3251

A second major is required.
For students interested in PreK-5 licensure, it may be possible
to combine course work from the early childhood major and
the elementary major. Interested students should discuss this
with Professor Amy Palmeri.

Elementary Education
THE specialization in elementary education is field-oriented
and designed to prepare students to teach children in grades
K-5. Beginning in the freshman year, students observe and
participate in local schools and experimental classrooms on
campus. Most Liberal Education Core courses are taken in the
College of Arts and Science.
Students must combine a specialization in elementary education with a second major in the liberal arts, an interdisciplinary major, or another major offered by Peabody College or the
College of Arts and Science. Course work beyond the standard
120-hour program may be required for some double majors.
Vanderbilt students seeking teacher licensure must apply
through the Office of Teacher Licensure at Vanderbilt and
must meet licensure requirements in effect at the time of their
graduation, which may be different from licensure requirements in effect at the time they entered the program. Licensure requirements are currently undergoing change. Each
year, teacher licensure candidates should consult the current
Vanderbilt Undergraduate Catalog, the Undergraduate Guide
to Teacher Licensure published by the Vanderbilt Office of

Peabody College / Majors in Early Childhood and Elementary Education, and Secondary Education

Teacher Licensure, and the Undergraduate Handbook published by the Office of Undergraduate Academic Affairs.
B.S. Degree Requirements
Elementary Education (K–5 Licensure)
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Students take a minimum of 120 hours, distributed as follows:

Liberal Education Core Requirements. Minimum 60 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Cultural
Studies, Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill
these areas are located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook
(http://peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28
on the writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27
or above and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete
English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully
complete one writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writingintensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses)
or end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation,
all students must successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-year Seminars when open
registration begins.

Professional Education Core. 28 hours.
EDUC 1220, 3212, 3214, 3215, 3270; MTED 3250; SCED 3240; SSED
3240; HMED 2250; SPED 1210; PSY-PC 2600

Field Experiences. 15 hours.
EDUC 3216, 3240, 4952, 4962; MTED 3251

An approved second major is required.
For students interested in PreK-5 licensure, it may be possible
to combine course work from the early childhood major and
the elementary major. Interested students should discuss this
with Professor Amy Palmeri.

Secondary Education
THE major in secondary education is designed to prepare the
student to teach one or more subjects at the secondary level
(grades 6–12). Students must complete Liberal Education Core
requirements, Professional Education requirements, and a primary area of emphasis in at least one endorsement field, which
involves 27 to 36 hours of course work in the discipline and
results in a major in that area as defined by the College of Arts
and Science. Specific requirements for a second area of endorsement may be obtained from the Office of Teacher Licensure in
the Peabody Administration Building. Students must take the
appropriate methods course for each area of endorsement.

387

Vanderbilt students seeking teacher licensure must apply
through the Peabody Office of Teacher Licensure and must
meet licensure requirements in effect at the time of their graduation, which may be different from licensure requirements in
effect at the time they entered Vanderbilt. Licensure requirements are currently undergoing change. Each year, teacher
licensure candidates should consult the current Vanderbilt
Undergraduate Catalog, the Undergraduate Guide to Teacher
Licensure published by the Vanderbilt Office of Teacher
Licensure, and the Undergraduate Handbook published by the
Office of Undergraduate Academic Affairs.
B.S. Degree Requirements
Secondary Education (6–12 Licensure)
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this website:
registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/course-lookup/.

Students take a minimum of 120 hours, distributed as follows:

Liberal Education Core Requirements. Minimum 60 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Cultural
Studies, Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill
these areas are located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook
(http://peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28
on the writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27
or above and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete
English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully
complete one writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writingintensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses)
or end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation,
all students must successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-year Seminars when open
registration begins.

Professional Education Core. 24 hours.

EDUC 1220, 3310, 3620, 3720; SPED 1210; Literacies course; Content
Learning course; Teaching Methods course

Field Experiences. 15 hours.
EDUC 3871, 3872; ENED, MTED, SCED, SSED 3371 and 4963; EDUC
4953

An approved second major is required.

P

388

vanderbilt university

Major in Human and Organizational Development
CHAIR Paul W. Speer
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Leigh Z. Gilchrist
PROFESSORS EMERITI John M. Braxton, Robert L. Crowson, Jr., Joseph
J. Cunningham, Paul R. Dokecki, Craig Anne Heflinger, Robert B. Innes
PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE, EMERITA Vera A. Stevens Chatman,
Janet S. Eyler
PROFESSORS Sandra Barnes, Bradley T. Erford, Ellen Goldring, Carolyn
J. Heinrich, Velma McBride Murry, Joseph F. Murphy, Douglas D.
Perkins, Marybeth Shinn, Paul W. Speer
RESEARCH PROFESSOR Mark Lipsey
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Sharon L. Shields
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR EMERITUS Richard L. Percy
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Robert Dale Ballou, Mark D. Cannon, Brian
D. Christens, William R. Doyle, James C. Fraser, Seth L. Gershenson,
Jason A. Grissom, Christopher Loss, Maury Nation, Claire E. Smrekar,
Matthew G. Springer
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Kimberly D. Bess, Xiu
Chen Cravens, Andrew J. Finch, Christine M. Quinn Trank
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Angela Boatman, Christopher H. Candelaria,
Ashley Carse, David K. Diehl, Brent J. Evans, Anjali Forber-Pratt,
Joanne W. Golann, Yolanda J. McDonald, Jessica M. Perkins, Sara
Safransky, Matthew P. Shaw, Adela Soliz
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Gina L. Frieden, Leigh Z.
Gilchrist, Brian L. Heuser, David Laird, Heather L. Smith, Sarah V. Suiter
PRINCIPAL SENIOR LECTURERS Leslie D. Kirby, Andrew J. Van Schaack
SENIOR LECTURERS Nicole A. Cobb, José Cossa, Brenda McKenzie
LECTURERS Corbette Doyle, Susan K. Friedman, Heather C. Lefkowitz,
Nancy Nolan, Kristen C. Tompkins

THE Human and Organizational Development major prepares
students to solve human problems in organizations and communities. Doing so requires knowledge of human development,
group dynamics, organizational theory and behavior, economics,
public policy, statistics, and methods of inquiry. The curriculum
is planned to ensure that students obtain a strong foundation in
science and liberal arts, with an emphasis on developing writing,
oral presentation, and analytic skills.
In addition to the core curriculum, students select a concentration or track that provides a focus for their study during
the junior and senior years. The track options are Community
Leadership and Development, Health and Human Services,
International Leadership and Development, Leadership and
Organizational Effectiveness, and Education Policy. Many students also add an additional major or minor which is handled
through the respective departments of those programs.
The HOD program is guided by an active learning approach
to education. Students learn new ideas and concepts through
seminars, simulations, case studies, field experiences, and
interaction with professionals in the field. In addition, students
are required to complete a semester-long capstone internship
during which they demonstrate the core competencies of HOD:
understanding and solving problems in organizations and communities. Through the course work that accompanies the internship, students integrate and apply concepts from earlier classes to
understand organizational performance and complete a project
that enhances the effectiveness of the organization. Because the
student chooses the internship placement, this experience also
provides valuable vocational and career development in the
student’s field of interest. Students can apply for internships in
Nashville, Chicago, New York, San Francisco, Washington, D.C.,
and London, England.

Graduates of the program assume positions in business,
government agencies, social enterprises, and non-profit
organizations. In addition, many students enter graduate or
professional programs in business, community development,
counseling, divinity, education, health promotion, human
resource development, law, or medicine.
The core curriculum is designed to help students:
1. Understand the basic principles and typical patterns of
human development across the life cycle and use this knowledge to understand their own behavior and the behavior of
others;
2. Understand the principles of group dynamics and use
this knowledge to provide leadership and facilitate decision
making in small group settings;
3. Understand theories of organizations and apply them to
the solution of organizational problems;
4. Apply quantitative and qualitative methods of systematic
inquiry and analysis;
5. Understand basic economics including monetary and
fiscal theory;
6. Understand public policy processes and the factors that
influence policy making;
7. Understand the ethical dimensions of personal and organizational decisions and apply this understanding to analyze
social issues and make professional and personal decisions;
8. Develop enhanced skills of synthesis including the ability
to integrate ideas from various sources, to appreciate diversity,
and to design innovative programs.
In addition, the program helps students develop the following skills:
1. Written communication with emphasis on developing
a clear, concise, expository style and mastering the practical
forms used in professional situations;
2. Oral presentation with emphasis on making informative
and persuasive presentations with the effective use of technology and media;
3. Analytic thinking with emphasis on applying analysis,
creative thinking, and the skills of systems thinking to the
recognition, definition, and solution of personal, professional,
organizational, and social problems;
4. Interpersonal communication with emphasis on inquiry,
advocacy, and conflict resolution skills;
5. Leadership with emphasis on motivating others, managing talent, and teamwork.
Honors Program
The HOD Honors Program is designed for highly motivated
students who are looking for an opportunity to pursue intensive
study in personal areas of interest. It offers outstanding undergraduate HOD majors an opportunity to undertake advanced
reading and become involved in research teams with professors
and graduate students. The program also offers special opportunities for individual supervision that will help students develop
writing and presentation skills to compete successfully in the
world’s best graduate programs.
The program is open to students who have completed the
sophomore year with a 3.6 cumulative (overall) GPA. Students

Peabody College / Major in Human and Organizational D evelopment

admitted to the honors program participate in advanced empirical (quantitative or qualitative) research for two semesters and
complete an honors thesis. Although not required, honors
projects may be coordinated with HOD internships. Students
are also encouraged to attend departmental colloquia and to
take at least one graduate course in their area of interest.
Curriculum
Students take a minimum of 120 hours.

Liberal Education Core Requirements. 40 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill these areas are
located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook (http://peabody.
vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28
on the writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27
or above and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete
English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully
complete one writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writingintensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses)
or end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation,
all students must successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-Year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-Year Seminars when open
registration begins.

Human and Organizational Development Professional
Core. 18–20 hours.
These courses are listed in the Courses of Study section under Human
and Organizational Development and will include the following topics:
HOD 1250. Applied Human Development
HOD 1300. Small Group Behavior
HOD 2100. Understanding Organizations
HOD 2400. Talent Management and Organizational Fit
HOD 2500. Systematic Inquiry
HOD 2700. Public Policy

Practicum and Internship. 12–18hours.
The program includes a full-time internship (12–15 hours) and an optional
3-hour practicum experience.

Track. 15hours.
A block of courses within the student’s area of concentration: (1) Community Leadership and Development, (2) Health and Human Services, (3)
International Leadership and Development, (4) Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness, and (5) Education Policy.

Electives. 30–35 hours.
The Minor in Human and Organizational
Development
The minor in human and organizational development consists
of 18 hours in the following courses:

389
REQUIRED COURSE. 3 hours.
HOD 1250
Applied Human Development
CHOOSE TWO ADDITIONAL CORE COURSES. 6 hours.
HOD 1300.
Small Group Behavior
HOD 2100.
Understanding Organizations (required for Leadership
		
and Organizational Effectiveness track students)
HOD 2500
Systematic Inquiry (prerequisite for HOD 2700, 		
		
Public Policy)
HOD 2700
Public Policy (Prerequisite, HOD 2500, is required 		
		
for Education Policy track students)
TRACK LEVEL COURSES: 9 hours.
Students will choose three courses (9 hours) from a single track to complete. The tracks are Community Leadership and Development, Health
and Human Services, International Leadership and Development, Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness, and Education Policy.
Community Leadership and Development Track [9 hours]
The 9-hour CLD track core requires three of the following five courses:
HODC 3202
Community Development Theory
HODC 3342
Introduction to Community Psychology
HODC 3352
Philanthropy and Social Problem Solving
HODC 3650
Community Development Seminar (Rotating topics; 		
Social Entrepreneurship will count in the core as 		
well as one additional seminar course)
Health and Human Services Track [9 hours]
The 9-hour HHS track core requires three of the following five courses:
HODH 3201
Introduction to Human Services
HODH 3211
Introduction to Counseling
HODH 3221
Health Service Delivery to Diverse Populations
HODH 3231
Introduction to Health Services
HODH 3241
Introduction to Health Policy
International Leadership and Development Track [9 hours]
The 9-hour ILD track core requires three of the following seven courses:
HODI 3200
Global Dimensions of Community Development
HODI 3210
Leadership and Change in International Organizations
HODI 3220
International Organizations and Economic Development
HODI 3230
Education and Economic Development
HODI 3240
Effectiveness in International For-Profit Organizations
HODI 3250
Building Knowledge Economics in Asia
HODI 3260
Education in the Asia-Pacific Region: Development, 		
		
Reform, and Innovation
Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness Track [9 hours]
The 9-hour LOE track core includes the following required courses:
HODL 3204
Leadership Theory and Practice (prerequisite HOD 		
		
2100)
HODL 3234
Advanced Organizational Theory (prerequisite HOD 		
		
2100)
And
One course chosen from the following five options:
HODL 3224
Analyzing Organizational Effectiveness
HODL 3244
Introduction to Human Resource Development
HODL 3254
Human Resource Management
HODL 3264
Evidence-based Practice in Organizations (prerequi-		
		
site HOD 2100; concurrent enrollment allowed)
HODL 3274
Managing Organizational Change (prerequisite HOD
		
3204 or HOD 3234)
Education Policy Track [9 hours]
The 9-hour EP track core has the following required courses:
HODE 3205
Education Policy Analysis Methods (prerequisite 		
		
HOD 2700 or PCSI 1100)
HODE 3215
Education and Public Policy (prerequisite HOD 2700
		
or PCSI 1100)
HODE 3225
Introduction to Public Finance of Education
Total hours in the minor: 18

P

390

vanderbilt university

Major in Special Education
CHAIR Joseph H. Wehby
DIRECTOR OF UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES Andrea M. Capizzi,
PROFESSORS EMERITI Anne L. Corn, Joseph J. Cunningham, Floyd
Dennis, Jr., Randall Harley, Ted S. Hasselbring, Carolyn Hughes,
Daniel J. Reschly, Mark Wolery,
PROFESSORS Marcia Barnes, Erik Carter, Laurie Cutting, Donna Ford,
Douglas Fuchs, Lynn S. Fuchs, Mary Louise Hemmeter, Robert
Hodapp, Ann P. Kaiser, Paul J. Yoder
PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Kimberly J. Paulsen
ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS Erin Barton, Deborah D. Hatton, Chris
Lemons, Jeanne Wanzek, Joseph H. Wehby
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF THE PRACTICE Naomi Tyler
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Victoria Knight, Joseph M. Lambert, Jennifer
Ledford, Blair Lloyd
ASSISTANT PROFESSORS OF THE PRACTICE Karen Blankenship,
Andrea M. Capizzi, Alexandra Da Fonte
RESEARCH ASSISTANT PROFESSORS Tamra Stambaugh, Sandra
Wilson
INSTRUCTOR IN THE PRACTICE Nealetta Houchins-Juarez

THE undergraduate program in special education prepares
students to work with persons with disabilities and leads to
licensure in special education. Students pursue an interdisciplinary major in exceptional learning with emphasis in
one of the three specialty areas: high-incidence disabilities
(interventionist program), multiple and severe disabilities
(comprehensive program), or visual disabilities. This major can
be combined with other majors in human and organizational
development, cognitive studies, child development, or Arts and
Science. The program is field oriented and problem centered,
with most professional courses requiring direct involvement
with individuals with disabilities. Beginning in the freshman
year, students observe and work in a variety of educational settings in local schools and in classrooms off campus.
Vanderbilt students seeking teacher licensure must apply
through the Office of Teacher Licensure at Vanderbilt and
must meet licensure requirements in effect at the time of their
graduation, which may be different from licensure requirements in effect at the time they entered the program. Each
year, teacher licensure candidates should consult the current
Vanderbilt Undergraduate Catalog, the Undergraduate Guide
to Teacher Licensure published by the Vanderbilt Office of
Teacher Licensure, and the Undergraduate Handbook published by the Office of Administration and Records.
Honors Program
The Honors Program in Special Education offers qualified
majors the opportunity to gain experience in conducting
research in collaboration with a faculty mentor. This experience culminates in the writing and presentation of a senior
project. Students who major in special education are eligible to
apply for the Honors Program in the spring of their sophomore year if they have an overall grade point average of 3.5.
Students who are accepted into the Honors Program, successfully complete the program, and maintain the required grade
point averages, will graduate with Honors in Special Education. Specific information concerning admission to and the
requirements of the Honors Program in Special Education is
available from Professor Andrea Capizzi, director of undergraduate studies for the Department of Special Education.

Students should be aware that participation in the Honors
Program is quite time-intensive and represents a substantial
commitment of effort across at least three semesters. Therefore,
potential participants must carefully consider whether they are
able to, and want to, devote the required time and energy to
this program.
B.S. Degree Requirements
NOTE: New course numbers took effect in fall 2015. Former course
numbers are included in course descriptions in this catalog and at this
website: registrar.vanderbilt.edu/faculty/course-renumbering/courselookup/.

Specializations are available in high-incidence disabilities/
interventionist (grades K–8/6–12 modified licensure), severe
disabilities (grades K–12 comprehensive licensure), and visual
disabilities (grades PreK–12 visual impairment licensure).
Total hours will vary depending on the area of specialization.
Students take a minimum of 120 hours, distributed as follows:

Liberal Education Core Requirements. Minimum 60 hours.
The Liberal Education Core is composed of required course work from the
areas of Communications, Humanities, Mathematics, Science, Cultural
Studies, Social Science, and Electives. Listings of all courses that may fulfill
these areas are located online in the Peabody Undergraduate Handbook
(http://peabody.vanderbilt.edu/admin-offices/oas/downloads.php).

Writing Requirement
All Peabody College freshmen who have not earned a combined score of
660 on the evidence-based reading and writing component of the redesigned SAT with minimum scores of 27 on the reading component and 28
on the writing and language component, or ACT English test score of 27
or above and a minimum writing score of 7 or above, or AP or IB English
scores above 4 and 6 respectively, are required to successfully complete
English 1100. Regardless of AP or IB credits, all freshmen must successfully
complete one writing-intensive course before their fourth semester. Writingintensive courses either have a “W” after the course number (A&S courses)
or end with the digit "7" (Peabody courses). In addition, before graduation,
all students must successfully complete a second writing course.
NOTE: First-Year Seminars (courses numbered 1111) offered through the College
of Arts and Science and the Blair School of Music may count as writing intensive
courses. Peabody freshmen may only register for First-Year Seminars when open
registration begins.

Specializations
The following SPED course is taken as part of the Liberal Education Core,
but is also required in each area of specialization.
SPED 1210. Introduction to Exceptionality
The following courses are required in each area of specialization.
SPED 1175. Freshman Seminar
SPED 2310. Managing Academic and Social Behavior
SPED 4950. Student Teaching Seminar
SPED 4954 or 4951. Student Teaching

Peabody College / Major in S pecial Education
SEVERE DISABILITIES PROGRAM/COMPREHENSIVE CORE.
SPEDS 2120. Issues in Family Intervention
SPEDS 2450. Augmentative and Alternative Communications
SPEDS 2430. Introduction to Language and Communications*
SPEDS 3300. Methods of Instruction for Students with Severe and
Multiple Disabilities
SPEDS 3312. Procedures in Transition to Adult Life
SPEDH 3328. Teaching Mathematics to Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties: K-8
SPEDH 3338. Teaching Reading to Students with Severe and Persistent
Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDS 3330. Characteristics of Students with Severe and Multiple Disabilities
SPEDS 3350. Access to General Education and Teaching Functional
Academics
SPEDS 3661. Fieldwork in Special Education: Severe Disabilities
SPEDS 3667. Seminar in Severe Disabilities Fieldwork
SPEDS 3871. Field Work in Special Education: Autism, Intellectual, and
Multiple Disabilities
HIGH-INCIDENCE PROGRAM/MODIFIED/INTERVENTIONIST CORE.
(Courses and specific to choice of licensure track.)
SPED 2160. Cultural Diversity in American Education*
SPEDH 3308. Understanding Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3318. Assessment for Students with Severe and Persistent
Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3328. Teaching Mathematics to Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties: K-8
SPEDH 3338. Teaching Reading to Students with Severe and Persistent
Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3348. Language and Learning*
SPEDH 3358. Advanced Reading Methods for Students with Severe and
Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3368. Teaching Middle School Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3378. Teaching High School Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3388. Teaching Mathematics to Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties 6-12
SPEDH 3777. School and Classroom Supports for Teaching Students
with Academic Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3871. Field Work in Special Education for Mild/Moderate Disabilities
VISUAL DISABILITIES PROGRAM CORE.
SPEDS 2120. Issues in Family Intervention*
SPEDS 2430. Introduction to Language and Communication*
SPEDV 3305. Medical and Educational Implications of Visual Impairment
SPEDV 3315. Educational Procedures for Students with Visual Impairment
SPEDV 3335. Braille Reading and Writing
SPEDV 3345. Communication and Literacy Skills for Students with Visual
Impairment
SPEDV 3355. Orientation and Mobility for Teachers of the Visually Impaired
SPEDV 3385. Advanced Procedures for Students with Visual Impairments
SPEDH 3871. Field Work in Special Education for Mild to Moderate Disabilities
SPEDH 3318. Assessment Strategies for Students with Severe and
Persistent Academic Difficulties
SPEDH 3328. Teaching Mathematics to Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties
SPEDH 3368. Teaching Middle School Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties
*Taken as part of the Liberal Education Core

391

Minor in Special Education
The minor in special education provides students with an
opportunity to develop familiarity and expertise in working
with children who have learning and social behavior problems. The minor requires 17 hours (15 unique to the minor) as
detailed below.
Required for all tracks (3 hours)
SPED 1210. Introduction to Exceptionality (3)
Electives (14 hours)
SPED 2310/3871. Managing Academic and Social Behavior (fieldwork)
[3/1]
SPEDH 3308. Understanding Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties [3]
SPEDH 3328/3871. Teaching Math to Students with Academic and
Behavior Difficulties (fieldwork) [3/1[
SPEDH 3338/3871. Teaching Reading to Students with Academic and
Behavior Difficulties (fieldwork) [3/1]
SPEDH 3348. Language and Learning [3]
SPED 2160. Cultural Diversity in American Education [3]
SPEDS 2120. Family Intervention [3]
SPED 2340. Introduction to Language and Communication [3]
SPED 3330/3871. Characteristics of Severe and Multiple Disabilities
(fieldwork) [3/1]
SPED 3312/3871. Procedures in Transition to Adult Life (fieldwork) [3/1]
SPEDS 3350. Access to General Education and Teaching Functional
Academics [3]
SPEDV 3305. Medical and Educational Implications of Visual Impairments [3]
SPEDV 3315. Educational Procedures for Students with Visual Impairments [3]
SPEDV 3335. Braille Reading and Writing [2]
SPEDV 3345. Communication Skills for Students with Visual Impairments
[3]
SPEDV 3385. Advanced Procedures for Students with Visual Impairments
[3]
Most courses are taught in sequence and have prerequisite courses.

P

392

vanderbilt university

Honors
Founder’s Medal
The Founder’s Medal, signifying first honors, was endowed
by Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt as one of his gifts to the
university. The recipient is named by the Dean after consideration of faculty recommendation and overall academic
achievements, as well as grade point averages of the year’s
highest ranking summa cum laude graduates.
Latin Honors Designation
Honors, which are noted on diplomas and published in the
Commencement Program, are earned as follows:
Summa Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average
equals or exceeds that of the top 5 percent of the previous
year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Magna Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average
equals or exceeds that of the next 8 percent of the previous
year’s Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Cum Laude. Students whose grade point average equals
or exceeds that of the next 12 percent of the previous year’s
Vanderbilt graduating seniors.
Dean’s List
The Dean’s List recognizes outstanding academic performance
in a semester. Students are named to the Dean’s List when they
earn a grade point average of at least 3.500 while carrying 12 or
more graded hours, with no temporary or missing grades in
any course (credit or non-credit), and no grade of F.
Kappa Delta Pi
Kappa Delta Pi is an education honor society organized in 1911
at the University of Illinois to foster excellence in scholarship,
high personal standards, improvement in teacher preparation,
distinction in achievement, and contributions to education.
Membership is limited to juniors and seniors with a grade
point average of 3.500 or better, and graduate students with a
grade point average of 3.750 or better. Candidates for membership must have completed at least 9 hours in education or
psychology.
Honor Societies for Freshmen
Freshmen who earn grade point averages of 3.500 or better for
their first semester are eligible for membership in the Vanderbilt chapters of Phi Eta Sigma and Alpha Lambda Delta.
Awards
KEVIN LONGINOTTI AWARD. Awarded annually to a graduating senior in
the Department of Teaching and Learning who shows exceptional promise as a future teacher at the secondary school level.
DOROTHY J. SKEEL AWARD FOR OUTSTANDING PROFESSIONAL
PROMISE (ELEMENTARY/EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION). Presented annually to the graduating senior in the Department of Teaching and
Learning who has shown exceptional promise as a future teacher at the
elementary school or early childhood level.

SENIOR THESIS AWARD. Awarded to the graduating senior in the Human and Organizational Development Program who has submitted the
most outstanding senior thesis. The winner is selected from a group of
five finalists who make an oral presentation of their theses to a panel of
five professors.
THE DEPARTMENT OF SPECIAL EDUCATION DISTINGUISHED ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AWARD. Awarded annually to the graduating senior in the Department of Special Education who exemplifies the highest
level of academic achievement.
THE DISTINGUISHED SERVICE IN SPECIAL EDUCATION AWARD. Presented annually to the graduating senior in the Department of Special Education who exemplifies the highest commitment to professional service in
special education.
THE PEABODY ALUMNI AWARD. Awarded by the Peabody Alumni Association to a member of the graduating class who has demonstrated
outstanding qualities of scholarship and leadership.
THE WILLIS D. HAWLEY AWARD. Awarded by students of Peabody College to a senior who exemplifies Peabody’s commitment of service to others.
DEAN’S AWARD FOR OUTSTANDING SCHOLARSHIP. Awarded to each
summa cum laude graduate.
YOUNG ALUMNI BOARD AWARD. Awarded by Peabody students to a
senior who has demonstrated outstanding qualities of scholarship, leadership, and commitment of service to others. The recipient of this award
represents the graduating class as a member of the alumni board for a
two-year term.
PSYCHOLOGY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT UNDERGRADUATE
HONORS AWARD. Awarded to the graduating senior who has successfully completed the Undergraduate Honors program in Cognitive Studies,
or Child Development, or Child Studies and who has produced the best
overall honor project.
EXCELLENCE IN CHILD DEVELOPMENT AWARD. Awarded to the graduating senior majoring in Child Development whose work in the opinion
of the faculty of the Department of Psychology and Human Development
exemplifies academic excellence.
EXCELLENCE IN COGNITIVE STUDIES AWARD. Presented annually by
the Department of Psychology and Human Development to the graduating senior who most clearly exemplifies the goals of the Cognitive Studies
Department.
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AWARDS. Established in 1999 and presented to the graduating seniors who exemplify the
highest levels of scholarship and leadership in the Human and Organizational Development Program. The awards are given in these areas: Community Service, Outstanding Community Development and Social Policy,
Outstanding Health and Human Services, and Outstanding Leadership
and Organizational Effectiveness.
SPECIAL EDUCATION TEACHER OF EXCELLENCE AWARD. Established
in 1999. Awarded annually by the Department of Special Education to the
graduating senior who has demonstrated the highest level of excellence in
teaching in the area of special education.

Peabody College / Post-Baccalaureate Programs

393

Post-Baccalaureate Programs

P

EABODY offers professional degree programs in the
following areas. Details of the post-baccalaureate
programs are published in the Peabody College Catalog,
available on request from the Office of Admissions and Records
at Peabody College.

Major

Degree

Child Studies
Clinical Psychological Assessment
Community Development and Action
Education Policy
Educational Leadership and Policy
Elementary Education
English Language Learners
Higher Education Administration
Higher Education Leadership and Policy
Human Development Counseling
Independent School Leadership
International Education Policy and Management
Leadership and Learning in Organizations
Leadership and Organizational Performance
Learning and Instruction
Learning, Diversity, and Urban Studies
Quantitative Methods
Reading Education
Secondary Education
Special Education

M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.P.P.			
Ed.D.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
Ed.D.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
Ed.D.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			
M.Ed.			

Five-year Child Studies Program at Peabody
The five-year Child Studies program offered by Peabody College is designed to blend the undergraduate program with the
master’s level program. Students who successfully complete
this combined program will earn their undergraduate B.S.
degrees and also earn their M.Ed. degrees by the end of their
fifth year at Peabody.
Under the combined five-year plan, undergraduates take 6
credit hours of professional courses during the senior year as
part of the 120 hours required for the B.S. degree. Professional
credit hours may not be used to satisfy undergraduate major
course requirements. A fifth year (including summer) follows,
during which students complete the additional 30 professional hours necessary for the master’s degree. Students in this
five-year program may take 6 hours during the senior year.
Students who plan to pursue a five-year program are required
to abide by the following guidelines; admission is competitive, and meeting minimum requirements does not guarantee
admission.
• Students should make application to the program by the
middle of the junior year at Vanderbilt.
• Applicants must have earned a minimum 3.00 grade
point average.
• Courses may not be transferred from another university
as a part of the master’s degree.

Department
Psychology and Human Development
Psychology and Human Development
Human and Organizational Development
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Teaching and Learning
Teaching and Learning
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Human and Organizational Development
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
Teaching and Learning
Teaching and Learning
Psychology and Human Development
Teaching and Learning
Teaching and Learning
Special Education

Child Studies
The master of education (M.Ed.) in Child Studies is designed
to give strong undergraduate students graduate preparation
and related supervisory experience pertinent to career development or further graduate/professional study involving children,
adolescents, families, schools, and related community services.
This 36-hour master’s program consists of 12-18 credit
hours of core curriculum course work and 18-24 credit hours
of elective course work that are individually tailored to each
student’s personal interests and professional goals. Our
program offers traditional classroom preparation alongside
hands-on practicum experiences or research mentorships,
which are integrated into the program of studies.
All students choose to complete one of two tracks: the
Applied Professional Track or the Empirical Research Track.
Both program options require that students become skilled
in integrating current child development research and theory
with effective practice in academic or professional settings.
Required courses focus on applied child development, developmental theory, and research methodology. Within each
track, there are additional areas of concentration including,
but not limited to, pediatric health care, developmental disabilities and early intervention services, early childhood, child
advocacy and public policy, youth development, poverty and
interventions, and arts and media. This degree culminates in
a capstone project exam that reflects the unique set of academic and professional experiences that compose the students’
program of studies.

P

394

vanderbilt university

Peabody College Courses
Human and Organizational D evelopment
HOD 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly HOD 1690] Commons S eminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year students.
S tudents and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized topic in
depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by T he Ingram Commons. General elective credit only. [1]
HOD 1115. First-Year Seminar. [Formerly HOD 1150] S elected T opics
for first-year students [3]
HOD 1250. Applied Human Development. [Formerly HOD 1000] Introduction to the processes of human development and how such development can be influenced. Emphasis is placed on social development
and implications for solving personal and professional problems. T he
course focuses on late adolescent and young adult development. [3]
HOD 1300. Small Group Behavior. [Formerly HOD 1100] D esigned to
improve the student's ability to analyze behavioral patterns in groups
such as leadership, conflict, and decision making and group roles. T he
student is expected to improve his/her abilities by effective participation in the group as well as in written analyses. Problems for analysis
are drawn from events in the group and from theoretical readings. [3]
HOD 2100. Understanding Organizations. [Formerly HOD 1200]
Introduction to theory and research on human behavior in organizations. A imed at providing a framework for understanding the dynamics
of organizations around the basic issues that confront all organizations
(e.g., goal setting, work performance, leadership, decision making, and
managing change). [3]
HOD 2260. Economics of Human Resources. [Formerly HOD 2260]
A n introduction to economics, with heavy emphasis on microeconomics of the family, household, consumer, and business firm. A pplications to the economics of government, poverty, discrimination, labor
markets, the environment, education, and other human resource and
human development topics will be included. T he class will be primarily lecture format with some small group interactions and discussions.
Prerequisite: S tatistics course: PSY -PC 2110, PSY 2100, ECON 1500,
MAT H 2810 or MAT H 2820. [3]
HOD 2400. Talent Management and Organizational Fit. [Formerly
HOD 1400] T his course examines the theories, concepts, tools, and
processes associated with talent management and synergistic organizational fit. Given that organizations recognize that employee talents, skills,
and motivations drive organizational performance and success, students
will explore the theories, concepts, and processes organizations use to
plan, source, attract, select, train, monitor, develop, retain, promote, and
move employees through the organization. It provides a deeper understanding of organizational performance and HR /talent, strategy, and core
competency alignment issues. Outcomes from this course are applied
and built upon in the HOD capstone internship experience. [3]
HOD 2500. Systematic Inquiry. [Formerly HOD 1700] Qualitative and
Quantitative research methods with an emphasis on formulating clear
and concise questions, evaluating authoritative sources of information,
designing and conducting research studies, and reporting results in a
professional format. [3]
HOD 2700. Public Policy. [Formerly HOD 1800] A n exploration of the
foundations of public policy, the policy process, and the factors that
influence policy making at the national and state levels, with particular
attention to the development of student analytic and writing skills. Prerequisite: HOD 2500. [3]
HOD 3200. Introduction to Data Science. Provides students with both
theoretical and practical knowledge of data science, including accessing data, analyzing data, and presenting data analysis. D ata access
topics include web scraping, using application programming interfaces
and database queries. D ata analysis topics include linear regression,

logistic regression, and basics of unsupervised machine learning.
D ata analysis will also cover cross validation. D ata presentation topics include univariate and bivariate graphs, lattice graphing, mapping
and interactive graphics. Emphasizes literate programming as basis for
access, analysis and presentation. Prerequisite: Introductory S tatistics
or permission of instructor. [3]
HOD 3850. Independent Study in Human and Organizational Development. [Formerly HOD 2980] Individual programs of reading or the
conduct of R esearch studies in human and organizational development.
Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]
HOD 3860. Directed Research. [Formerly HOD 2989] Consent of
supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]
HOD 3864. Research Experience. [Formerly HOD 2950] T his course
provides undergraduate students in HOD direct experience in conducting research. T he course is designed for students interested in going on
to graduate school as well as students who want to gain experience in
generating knowledge in an information economy. T he course conducts
a review of research methodologies and requires students to critically
read and deconstruct published research studies. D ata analysis skills
are sharpened in the computer lab and put into practice on their own
research. S tudents conduct several independent research projects during the semester. Prerequisite: HOD 2500 and a statistics class. [3]
HOD 3870. Practicum in Human and Organizational Development.
[Formerly HOD 2000] A n intensive practicum experience. T hree contact
hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]
HOD 3890. Special Topics in Human and Organizational Development. [Formerly HOD 2290] Exploration of special issues on topics
related to human and organizational development. May be repeated for
credit with change of topic. [1-3]
HOD 4950. Human Development Internship. [Formerly HOD 2900] A n
intensive work experience which involves working four days a week for
one semester. T he internship includes completion of a specific project
for the organization. Corequisite: HOD 4951, 4952, 4953. [3-6]
HOD 4951. Advanced Seminar in Human and Organizational Development. [Formerly HOD 2910] Provides an opportunity to integrate
human development theory, knowledge, and skills by applying them to
the solution of problems in internship settings. Corequisite: HOD 4950,
4952, 4953. [3]
HOD 4952. Theoretical Applications of Human and Organizational
Development. [Formerly HOD 2920] S tudents complete assignments
and structured activities that demonstrate their ability to apply theories and skills acquired in the six Human D evelopment Program core
courses to understanding situations and solving problems that naturally
occur during their internship experience. Must be taken in conjunction
with the Human and Organizational D evelopment Program internship.
Corequisite: HOD 4950, HOD 4951, HOD 4953. Prerequisite: HOD
1250, 1300, 2100, 2400, 2500, 2700. [3]
HOD 4953. Senior Project. [Formerly HOD 2930] S tudents complete a
specific project or assemble a portfolio that demonstrates their professional competence in their area of specialization. T he portfolio includes
written products and a videotape oral presentation on a topic appropriate to the student's area of specialization. [3]
HOD 4960. Honors Capstone Internship. [Formerly HOD 2940] S tudents admitted to the Human and Organizational D evelopment Honors
Program may complete a capstone internship. [3]
HOD 4978. Senior Thesis. [Formerly HOD 2960] [3]
HOD 4980. Human and Organizational Development Honors Seminar. [Formerly HOD 2990] Open to students majoring in human and organizational development who are admitted to the Honors Program. [3]

Peabody College / Courses

Community Development and Leadership
HODC 3202. Community Development Theory. [Formerly HOD 2600]
T his is a core course in the Community L eadership and D evelopment
(CLD ) track of the HOD undergraduate program. It is designed to provide a general introduction to the field of community development (CD )
by examining appropriate theoretical perspectives. Ecological theory,
critical theory, and theories of democracy will be studied for their application to community development issues. T he theoretical perspectives
examined in the course will also be linked to the diverse fields which
inform community development, such as community psychology, sociology, geography, anthropology, education, and planning. A dditionally, the
course will provide students a more in-depth understanding of particular
community development issues by exploring how alternative theoretical
perspectives interpret several important community development phenomena. T he course will prepare students to understand the theoretical
orientations that underlie the dynamics of community development. [3]
HODC 3212. Community Development Organizations and Policies.
[Formerly HOD 2610] Introduction to the practice of community development (CD ), including analysis of, and experience with, CD issues, organizations, and policies. Prepares students to work with public or community agency staff, administrators, planners, policy-makers, or community
organizers and leaders, who require analysis and recommendations on
particular community issues. S tudents may also develop experience as
part of a research, intervention, or policy development team. T he course
also focuses on ways ordinary people can become involved in improving
their own neighborhoods, communities, and city. [3]
HODC 3222. Action Research and Program Evaluation. [Formerly
HOD 2620] T his is a specialty core requirement for the Community L eadership and D evelopment (CLD ) track in the Human and Organizational
D evelopment program. Course teaches policy-relevant field research
methods in the context of action science. S tudents do an actual research
project for a client organization and prepare a report with recommendations for policy and action. S tudents get experience in the conduct of the
research as a team of a fictitious consulting organization. [3]
HODC 3232. Ethics for Human Development Professionals. [Formerly HOD 2280] (A lso listed as HOD 5100 for professional students)
N ormative evaluation of ethical issues in serving human need. Conflicting values within moral dilemmas will be examined from a variety of
theoretical perspectives and practical criteria. Case studies of moral
issues confronting the individual, the family, service organizations, and
the general public will be reviewed. [3]
HODC 3312. Procedures in Transition to Adult Life. [Formerly HOD
2640] (A lso listed as S PEDS 3312) Overview of history, legislation, and
practice in the areas of community and employment integration for
persons with disabilities. Emphasis on various strategies for promoting a successful transition from school to life. S tudents are required to
develop instructional plans for integration within the community. S tudents will apply their skills in community or classroom settings. [3]
HODC 3313. Practicum: Transition to Adult Life. [Formerly HOD
2641] Field-based application of correlated course content to instructional strategies. A ssessing, planning, implementing, and evaluating
instructional procedures for community and employment integration.
Corequisite: HOD C 3312. [1]
HODC 3322. Religious and Spiritual Organizations. [Formerly HOD
2650] T he class focuses on traditional and less studied religious and
spiritual organizations and compares and contrasts their features,
goals, structures, leaders, and personnel with secular organizations
such as businesses. Information is also provided about how religious
and/or spiritual features are being incorporated in a variety of organizational settings. [3]
HODC 3332. High Poverty Youth: Improving Outcomes. [Formerly
HOD 2665] (A lso listed as S PED 3332) Y outh from high-poverty backgrounds may be at risk for outcomes that include academic failure,
school dropout, drug abuse, unemployment, or incarceration. S tudents
will be working with schools and community agencies in N ashville to
improve outcomes for youth living in high-poverty neighborhoods.

395
T here will be class meetings as well as ongoing service-learning field
experiences. Fieldwork will include mentoring, tutoring, or providing job
readiness training to youth in neighborhood community centers or students' high schools. [3]
HODC 3342. Introduction to Community Psychology. [Formerly HOD
2670] T heory, research, and action in community psychology. History
of mental health care; ecological theories of community, stress, coping,
and social support; deviance labeling; community assessment strategies; prevention, empowerment, and community and organizational
change programs; societal-level intervention policies. [3]
HODC 3352. Philanthropy and Social Problem Solving. [Formerly
HOD 3890] T his course provides an opportunity to engage in the practice of philanthropy, while learning about charitable giving/fundraising,
social problem-solving, and the non-profit sector. T he semester will be
divided into four sections: I. Problem identification; II. A pproaches to
change; III . Evaluating organizational effectiveness/impact and fit with
theories of change; and IV . D ecision making. Prerequisite: S tudents
must have taken courses in group processes (HOD 1300 or equivalent), organizations (HOD 2100 or equivalent), and systematic inquiry/
research methods (HOD 2500 or equivalent), so that they are prepared
to work in teams and to analyze both social problems and the organizations that aim to deal with them. [3]
HODC 3650. Community Leadership and Development Seminar.
[Formerly HOD 2680] Exploration of selected topics related to the community leadership and development track of the Human and Organizational D evelopment program. May be repeated for credit with change
of topic. [3]
HODC 3850. Independent Study in Community Leadership and Development. [Formerly HOD 2986] Individual programs of reading or the conduct of research studies in community leadership and development. Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]
HODC 3870. Practicum in Community Leadership and Development. [Formerly HOD 2060] A n intensive practicum experience. T hree
contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]
HODC 3890. Special Topics in Community Leadership and Development. [Formerly HOD 2690] Exploration of special issues on topics
related to community leadership and development. May be repeated
for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

Education Policy
HODE 3205. Education Policy Analysis Methods. [Formerly HOD
2800] How should the government choose among options to address
the country's education problems? T he main goal of this course is to
introduce students to the concepts, methods, and tools useful in performing policy analysis in general, and to give students practice applying the policy analysis methods to real-world educational policy issues
including school vouchers, using measures of teacher value-added,
financing higher education, and the importance of resources for schooling and student achievement. Prerequisite: HOD 2700 or PS CI 1100. [3]
HODE 3215. Education and Public Policy. [Formerly HOD 2810]
T he course explores contemporary social, philosophical, and political
dimensions of education policy, including issues related to civic engagement, equity and school organization, and the ecology of schooling.
Course readings and discussions will involve fundamental questions
about the relationship between schools and society: What is the purpose of A merican public education? How do policy values, including
equity and excellence, social justice and accountability, shape education policy? How is education policy related to social and economic
outcomes and opportunities? Prerequisite: HOD 2700 or PS CI 1100. [3]
HODE 3225. Introduction to Public Finance of Education. [Formerly
HOD 2820] In this course, we first provide a foundation of knowledge
for the economics of the public sector. In this part of the course, we will
discuss the appropriate role of government activity in a market economy as well as other behavioral consequences of government policy
from the perspective of the consumers, the policymakers, regulators,
and general taxpayers. A fter establishing a better understanding of the

P

396

vanderbilt university

economics of the public sector, we will examine economic models to
explain real world government policymaking with a specific focus on
education policy, including the rationale and mechanisms of funding
education as well other important policy issues such as the provision
of early childhood education, teacher labor markets, and accountability
and school choice programs. [3]

emphasis on the T ennessee S tate L egislature and Metropolitan D avidson County. Opportunities are available for application to national and
international issues. L earners will be provided with a foundation from
which to base their work, including an overview of the U . S . health care
system and public health infrastructure, as well as a framework for conducting policy analyses. [3]

HODE 3315. State and Local Government. [Formerly HOD 2850]
Examines the operation of state and local governments within the
A merican federal system. S tudents will have met expectations for the
course when they are able to express well their understanding of how
A merican state and local governments serve the interests of their residents within a system that is highly charged politically. Prerequisite:
HOD 2700 or PS CI 1100. [3]

HODH 3311. Introduction to Health Promotion. [Formerly HOD 2530]
T his course is designed to enhance the student's understanding of
health promotion concepts that relate directly to improved lifestyle
behavior change and disease risk reduction. In addition, health promotion program development, program management, and program initiatives in a variety of settings will be addressed. [3]

HODE 3650. Seminars in Education Policy. [Formerly HOD 2880]
Exploration of special issues related to the education policy track of the
Human and Organizational D evelopment program. May be repeated for
credit with change of topic. [3]
HODE 3850. Independent Study in Education Policy. [Formerly HOD
2988] Individual programs of reading or the conduct of research studies
in education policy. Consent of supervising faculty member required.
May be repeated. [1-3]
HODE 3870. Practicum in Education Policy. [Formerly HOD 2080] A n
intensive practicum experience. T hree contact hours per week required
for each credit hour. [1-3]
HODE 3890. Special Topics in Education Policy. [Formerly HOD
2890] Exploration of selected topics related to education policy. May
be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

Health and Human Services
HODH 3201. Introduction to Human Services. [Formerly HOD 2500]
T his course is a comprehensive and realistic survey of the diverse and
dynamic field of human services. S tudents will examine: 1) significant
historical developments, 2) populations served, 3) social welfare/poverty theories, 4) career opportunities, and 5) controversial and ethical
issues. T he course will emphasize special tasks and activities that are
performed by the contemporary human service worker. [3]
HODH 3211. Introduction to Counseling. [Formerly HOD 2505] A n
overview of the counseling profession: theories, techniques, settings,
and specialty areas. In addition to lectures and class discussions, the
course includes an experiential component designed to increase students' listening and responding skills. By the end of the course, students
will have a clear understanding of what being a counselor entails. [3]
HODH 3221. Health Service Delivery to Diverse Populations. [Formerly HOD 2510] T his course focuses on the study of value systems of
diverse groups, as well as variables related to gender, age, lifestyle, religion, social class, race, geography, and developmental state, and how
these relate to health status and health service needs. T his course provides students with a basic knowledge and understanding of diversity
so that they may be more effective in serving the needs of all people.
T ransportation class fee: $50.00 [3]
HODH 3231. Introduction to Health Services. [Formerly HOD 2525]
T his course will focus on the evolution of the U .S . health care system, as
well as on the evolution of health care systems in diverse environments
from around the globe. T he content of the course focuses on the nature
and dynamics of the macro health system environments and the design
and function of organizational models in those environments. Particular
attention will be paid to contemporary health service organizational models, such as managed care, integrated delivery systems, and physicianhospital organizations. T opics include education and training of health
care professionals, the role of health care providers, public, private, and
voluntary agencies, and the interests of major stake holders. [3]
HODH 3241. Health Policy. [Formerly HOD 2535] T his course presents broad perspectives for understanding health policy within historical, political, and economic contexts. L ectures and assignments will
primarily focus on health policy in the U nited S tates with a particular

HODH 3321. Introduction to Sports Medicine. [Formerly HOD 2540]
Current topics in sports medicine, with an emphasis on prevention,
management, and rehabilitation, and administrative aspects of sports
medicine. [3] (N ot currently offered)
HODH 3331. Managing Health Care Organizations. [Formerly HOD
2550] T his is an applied course which combines theoretical knowledge
with professional learning experiences, such as case studies, guest lectures, films, management development exercises, and group projects.
T his course provides a conceptual review of basic managerial functions such as 1) planning, 2) organizing, 3) controlling, 4) staffing, and
5) influencing. T he course addresses related managerial activities such
as communication, decision making, and legal and legislative issues.
Prerequisite: HOD H 3201 or HOD H 3231. [3]
HODH 3650. Health and Human Services Seminar. [Formerly HOD
2580] Exploration of special issues related to the health and human
services track of the Human and Organizational D evelopment Program.
May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [3]
HODH 3850. Independent Study in Health and Human Services.
[Formerly HOD 2985] Individual programs of reading or the conduct of
research studies in Health and Human S ervices. Consent of supervising
faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]
HODH 3870. Practicum in Health and Human Services. [Formerly
HOD 2050] A n intensive practicum experience. T hree contact hours per
week required for each credit hour. [1-3]
HODH 3890. Special Topics in Health and Human Services. [Formerly HOD 2590] Exploration of selected topics related to health and
human services. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

International Leadership and Policy
HODI 3200. Global Dimensions of Community Development. [Formerly HOD 2400] T he globalization process induces new forms of
human organization and transforms existing organizations at the community, national, and international levels. T his course provides an
understanding of the nature, functioning, and development of organizations affected by globalization in societies different from our own and
as they relate to multilateral or global institutions that span different
social and cultural settings. T o do this, the course explores organizations from a comparative perspective, using the analytical framework of
human ecology, in terms of differential access to economic and other
productive assets, education and information, security and the rule of
law, social capital and cultural identity. [3]
HODI 3210. Leadership and Change in International Organizations. [Formerly HOD 2410] T his course uses an interdisciplinary case
study approach to investigate organizational challenges associated
with today's international environment. S tudents examine the impact
of culture, politics, and policy, and other international phenomena
such as exchange rates, trade, and capital markets on organizational
leadership, structure, and performance. S tudents also explore various
dilemmas that confront decision-makers in international organizations
as they attempt to reconcile institutional objectives, individual preferences, and varying cultural norms.[3]
HODI 3220. International Organizations and Economic Development. [Formerly HOD 2420] T he number of international organizations

Peabody College / Courses
has proliferated since World War II, and their functions have diversified.
S ome are altruistic. Others are regulatory. S ome serve as forums for
debate, others as instruments for military action or enforcement of international agreements in such diverse fields as health, labor, agriculture,
human rights, environment, culture, and trade. T his course addresses
how these organizations are financed, how they are governed, and how
they create and manage political controversy. It covers their legal mandates and structure, seeks to develop awareness of issues of human
capital and the World Bank, addresses the controversies and debates
over globalization and the role of international organizations in the international regulatory environment, and assesses the future of such organizations in an increasingly interdependent world. [3]
HODI 3230. Education and Economic Development. [Formerly HOD
2430] T his course reviews the history and application of human capital
theory. It provides students with examples of applications in economic
development policy. It gives students practice in applying common statistical models. It exposes students to current debates in education
policy in the World Bank and other international organizations which
result from those models. [3]
HODI 3240. Effectiveness in International For-Profit Organizations.
[Formerly HOD 2470] Intercultural understandings and skills are key in
today's job market, due to fast-growing opportunities and challenges
in international, multinational and global businesses. In this course
students will, through a variety of methodologies, explore the current
trends of exploding world trade, emerging nations, competition for talent and resources, and the impact of technology and changing demographics. A dditionally, students will develop skills and understandings
in working with cultures, managing cross-cultural teams, and the ins
and outs of working abroad. [3]
HODI 3250. Building Knowledge Economics in Asia. [Formerly HOD
2450] T his course focuses on the challenges and opportunities faced
by the A sia-Pacific R egion in making the transition to knowledge-based
economies. T opics cover global, regional, and country-specific policies and initiatives aimed at building the four pillars of the Knowledge
Economy (as defined by the World Bank): economic incentive and institutional regime, education, innovation, and information and communications technologies. T his course is intended for advanced undergraduate students interested in gaining a deeper understanding of the
transformational changes in the vast and diverse region. [3]
HODI 3260. Education in the Asia-Pacific Region: Development,
Reform, and Innovation. [Formerly HOD 2445] T his course focuses on
an in-depth analysis of current developments in education and schooling in the vast and diverse A sia-Pacific R egion. S tudents will examine
perspectives from educational researchers, policy makers and practitioners on the major issues, concerns and prospects regarding educational developments in the region. [3]
HODI 3270. Global Sustainable Development. T his interdisciplinary
course will help students to develop a capacity to analyze society-environment relations across spacial scales (from local to the global) using
approaches from multiple academic disciplines and professional fields.
T he course's dual focus on analytical approaches and environmental
objects (rather than a typical emphasis on problems) underscores the
fact that today's concerned citizens and professionals must be able
to analyze complex society-environmental relations from multiple perspectives and at multiple scales. S ustainability demands insights and
methods from education, the social sciences, business and organizational studies, the natural sciences, and more. [3]
HODI 3650. International Leadership and Development Seminar.
[Formerly HOD 2480] Exploration of special issues related to the international leadership and development track of the Human and Organizational D evelopment program. May be repeated for credit with change
of topic. [3]
HODI 3850. Independent Study in International Leadership and
Development. [Formerly HOD 2984] Individual programs of reading or
the conduct of research in international leadership and development.
Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

397
HODI 3870. Practicum in International Leadership and Development. [Formerly HOD 2040] A n intensive practicum experience. T hree
contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]
HODI 3875. Field School in Intercultural Education. [Formerly HOD
2460] T his course takes place in various sites over a 10-week period
in the summer session. It provides training in community field research
and analysis techniques directed to human, social, and civic development issues. [3]
HODI 3890. Special Topics in International Leadership and Development. [Formerly HOD 2490] Exploration of special topics related to
international leadership and development. May be repeated for credit
with change of topic. [1-3]

Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness
HODL 3204. Leadership Theory and Practice. [Formerly HOD 2700]
A systematic systematic study of the formal theories and models of the
leadership process and the research supporting and challenging them.
S tudents will complete a wide range of leadership self-assessments;
design a leadership self-development plan; and participate in individual
and group problem solving, decision making, conflict resolution, and
performance appraisal simulations and case studies focusing on personal and organizational effectiveness. Prerequisite: HOD 2100. [3]
HODL 3224. Analyzing Organizational Effectiveness. [Formerly HOD
2715] Effective leaders are able to analyze internal results and external
trends in order to make effective decisions. S tudents will gain first-hand
knowledge of the financial and strategic issues critical to effective decision-making through a mix of lectures, case studies and one problembased learning module. T he primary focus will be on the relevant critical
thinking skills such as identifying relevant decision criteria, interpreting
trends in the underlying data (both financial and operational), and communicating that analysis to executives in a manner that can be readily
digested. [3]
HODL 3234. Advanced Organizational Theory. [Formerly HOD 2720]
A comprehensive study of current theories and applied research in
organizational effectiveness. Emphasis is on the principles and practices of organizational restructuring, organizational development and
planned changes, systems and processes, self-managed teams, and
T otal Quality. Experiential learning through simulations and field work
will reinforce systematic inquiry, strategic planning, and applied organizational assessment skills. Prerequisite: HOD 2100. [3]
HODL 3244. Introduction to Human Resource Development. [Formerly HOD 2730] A n introduction to the theory and practice of human
resource development (design and implementation of training in corporate or human service organizations). S pecial emphasis on roles played
by HRD professionals and concepts and skills needed for entry into the
profession. [3]
HODL 3254. Human Resource Management. [Formerly HOD 2740]
A comprehensive survey of human resource management theory, procedures, and practices, with emphasis on the organizational leader's
role and responsibilities for recruiting and selection, placement and
career development, employee relations, labor relations, performance
appraisal, compensation and benefits, workplace ethics, equal employment opportunity, safety and health, legislation and workplace regulations, development of personnel policies and practices, and the techniques of strategic human resource planning. [3]
HODL 3264. Evidence-based Practice in Organizations. [Formerly
HOD 2745] A ccessing and using published research in solving organizational and social problems is a cornerstone of movements in
management, education, medicine and a range of other fields. U sing
evidence from academic research has even become part of the definition of ethical practice in many of these fields. A s a result, identifying
and appraising research studies that might be used to solve individual,
team and organizational problems has become a critical skill for practitioners. From this research, practitioners must be prepared to create
actionable interventions and to persuade others to adopt them. Prerequisite: HOD 2100 (concurrent enrollment allowed). [3]

P

398
HODL 3274. Managing Organizational Change. [Formerly HOD 2750]
This course focuses on organizational development philosophy and
practices of planned change, and the theory and techniques of organizational consulting. Students will participate in simulations and actual
organizational development interventions. Prerequisite: HODL 3204 or
HODL 3234. [3]
HODL 3314. Strategic Planning and Project Management. [Formerly HOD 2755] This advanced seminar and workshop-based course
focuses on the key organizational processes of strategic planning and
project management. Building on prior instruction in leadership and
organizational theory and practices, students will complete a critical
analysis of strategic leadership theory and models of organizational
planning. Activities include evaluation of internal and external factors
impacting on planning; participation in strategic planning and project
management simulations; evaluation of the performance of selected
strategic leaders as planners; and practice with key planning tools and
technologies. [3]
HODL 3324. Executive Leadership. [Formerly HOD 2770] This course
introduces students to concepts of leadership involved in various social,
political, and corporate domains. Course content relies on biographies
of renowned leaders to illustrate principles of executive leadership. [3]
HODL 3334. Challenges of Leadership. [Formerly HOD 2710] This
course is designed as an extension of the study of leadership theory
and practices begun in HODL 3204. Provides opportunities to investigate leadership concepts introduced in HODL 3204 in more depth.
Prerequisite: HODL 3204. [3]
HODL 3650. Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness Seminar.
[Formerly HOD 2780] Exploration of selected topics related to the leadership and organizational effectiveness track of the Human and Organizational Development program. May be repeated for credit with change
of topic. [3]
HODL 3850. Independent Study in Leadership and Organizational
Effectiveness. [Formerly HOD 2987] Individual Programs of readings
or the conduct of research studies in leadership and organizational
effectiveness. Consent of supervising faculty member required. May
be repeated. [1-3]
HODL 3870. Practicum in Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness. [Formerly HOD 2070] An intensive practicum experience. Three
contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]
HODL 3890. Special Topics in Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness. [Formerly HOD 2790] Exploration of selected topics related
to the leadership and organizational effectiveness track of the Human
and Organizational Development program. May be repeated for credit
with change of topic. [3]

Military Science—Peabody
MS-PC 1210. Leadership and Personal Development. [Formerly
MS-PC 111] (Formerly MS 111) Leadership is one of the most compelling topics of our time, and might be one of the most important attributes
for effectiveness in all levels of human endeavor. The success of one of
the most admired and respected institutions in our country, the military is
founded upon the understanding and effective application of leadership,
and the development of leaders. This course introduces students to the
personal challenges and competencies that are critical to effective leadership. The focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension
of leadership attributes and core leader competencies in a universal setting and exploring potential applications of these principles and practices
at Vanderbilt, in the military and in the corporate world. [1]
MS-PC 1210L. Leadership and Personal Development Lab. [Formerly
MS-PC 111A and MS 111A] Leader development is a continuous process of training, assessment and feedback with the goal of instilling and
enhancing desirable behavior in individuals and organizations. Within the
military science curriculum, this process is called the Leadership Development Program (LDP), modeled after the principles spelled out in Field
Manual 22-100, Army Leadership, and standardized both on campus

vanderbilt university
and Leadership Development and Assessment Course (LDAC) environments. The flexible methodology of LDP accommodates personalized,
individual development at all levels of proficiency throughout the officer
educational experience, from program entry to commissioning. The LDP
includes basic leadership training, periodic assessment and counseling
at both team and individual levels by experience observers. Trends and
deficiencies are identified and addressed with retraining and reassessment in a continuous cycle. Effective leader development is progressive,
building on lessons learned and maximizing individual potential. This
course introduces students to the leadership development process by
providing structured leadership opportunities in a variety of training settings. Student performance in leadership roles is assessed and notable
strengths and weaknesses are identified. A plan for improvement is discussed in detail during one-on-one counseling sessions. [1]
MS-PC 1230. Leadership and Personal Development II. [Formerly
MS-PC 113] (Formerly MS 113) What motivates others to follow a person is intriguing, inspiring and alluring. Through routine observation, we
learn from leaders regardless of the setting (military, business, education, etc.) This course provides an overview of leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problem-solving, listening, and providing
feedback. You will explore dimensions of leadership, values, attributes,
skills, and actions in a military context through practical, hands-on, and
interactive exercises. [1]
MS-PC 1230L. Leadership and Personal Development II Lab. [Formerly MS-PC 113A] (Formerly MS 113a) Leader development is a continuous process of training, assessment and feedback with the goal
of instilling and enhancing desirable behavior in individuals and organizations, this process is called the Leadership Development Program.
Effective leader development is progressive, building on lessons learned
and maximizing individual potential. This course introduces students to
the leadership development process by providing structured leadership
opportunities in a variety of training settings. A plan for improvement is
discussed in detail during one-on-one counseling sessions. [1]
MS-PC 2150. Foundations of Leadership. [Formerly MS-PC 150]
(Formerly MS 151) This course introduces the process of understanding and defining leaders in order to develop leadership skills appropriate for future commissioned Army officers. The class is broken down
into five key skill development areas: (1) values and ethics, (2) personal
development, (3) officership, (4) leadership and, (5) tactics and techniques. The class emphasizes individual leadership values and characteristics with a focus on leadership theory and interpersonal communications, army values, troop leading procedures, problem solving, and
team building in a military environment. [2]
MS-PC 2150L. Foundations of Leadership Lab. [Formerly MS-PC
150A] (Formerly MS 151) This lab builds upon the classroom topics in
MS-PC 2150 and introduces the process of understanding and defining
leaders in order to develop leadership skills appropriate for the future
commissioned officers. The lab is broken down into five key skill development areas: (1) leadership, (2) values and ethics, (3) personal development, (4) professional officership, and (5) various tactics, techniques,
and procedures. The lab emphasizes individual leadership values and
characteristics with a focus on leadership theory and interpersonal
communications, army values, troop leading procedures, problem solving, and team building in a military environment. [1]
MS-PC 2160. Foundations of Tactical Leadership. [Formerly MS-PC
152] This course builds upon MS-PC 2150. The course is broken down
into five key skill development levels: 1) leadership, 2) values and ethics, 3) personal development, 4) professional officership, and 5) various
tactics, techniques, and procedures. This class will focus on individual
leadership development where the student begins to plan, organize,
and lead small teams and groups in situational training exercises. Students begin to apply leadership skills at the smallest unit level. [1]
MS-PC 2160L. Foundations of Tactical Leadership Lab. [Formerly
MS-PC 152A] This course builds upon MS-PC 2150 and 2150L. The lab is
broken down into five key skill development levels: 1) leadership, 2) values
and ethics, 3) personal development, 4) professional officership, and 5)
various tactics, techniques, and procedures. This class will focus on indi-

Peabody College / Courses
vidual leadership development where the student begins to plan, organize, and lead small teams and groups in situational training exercises.
Students begin to apply leadership skills at the smallest unit level. [1]
MS-PC 3110. Leadership and Problem Solving. [Formerly MS 211]
This course builds upon your skills developed in MS-PC 2160 (1520,
and continues to develop leadership, officership skills, self-awareness,
and critical thinking skills through challenging scenarios related to
small-unit tactical operations. Cadets receive systematic and specific
feedback on their leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions. Prerequisite: MS-PC 1210 (111), 1230 (113), 2150 (150), and 2160 (152) [3]
MS-PC 3120. Applied Team Leadership. [Formerly MS-PC 212] (Formerly MS 212) Challenging scenarios related to small-unit tactical operations are used to develop self-awareness and critical thinking skills.
Cadets receive systematic and specific feedback on their leadership
values, attributes, skills, and actions. Open to ROTC cadets only. Prerequisite: MS-PC 3110. [3]
MS-PC 4150. Leadership and Ethics. [Formerly MS-PC 251] (Formerly MS 212) Students develops proficiency in planning, executing,
and assessing complex operations, functioning as a member of a staff,
and providing leadership-performance feedback to subordinates. Students are given situational opportunities to assess risk, make sound
ethical decisions, and provide coaching and mentoring to fellow ROTC
cadets. Open to ROTC cadets only. [3]
MS-PC 4160. Leadership in a Complex World. [Formerly MS-PC 252]
(Formerly MS 252) This course explores the dynamics of leading in the
complex situations of current military operations in the contemporary
operating environment. It introduces the concept of culture, its components, how culture influences human behavior, the impact of culturally influenced behavior on military operations, and how to analyze and
apply cultural considerations in the planning and execution of military
operations. Open to ROTC cadets only. Prerequisite: MS-PC 4150. [3]

Naval Science—Peabody
NS-PC 2410. Organization and Management. [Formerly NS 2410]
This course presents a comprehensive study of organizational behavior and management with special emphasis on situational leadership
in the military and civilian sectors and the development of your skills in
organizational thinking and problem solving. You will explore a variety
of leadership and management topics, including the classical theories
of management, motivation and communication. FALL. [3]
NS-PC 4242. Leadership and Ethics. [Formerly NS-PC 2420] An
exploration of major Western ethical philosophy in the development
and application of leadership to enhance objective, sound and timely
decision making in the most challenging of environments. This course
follows theoretical examination with case studies and practical application to emphasize the importance of ethical reasoning to leadership,
and explores components of character and integrity in decision making. SPRING. [3]

Psychology and Human Development
PSY-PC 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly PSY-PC 1690] Commons Seminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year
students. Students and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized
topic in depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by The Ingram
Commons. General elective credit only. [1]
PSY-PC 1115. First-Year Seminar. [Formerly PSY-PC 1150] Topics of
interest designed for first year students. Does not count in the writing
requirement of the Liberal Education Core. [3]
PSY-PC 1117. First Year Writing Seminar. [Formerly PSY-PC 1157]
Topics of interest for first year students. Courses are writing intensive
and may be applied to the Peabody Liberal Education Core writing
requirement. Repeatable with change of topic. [3]

399
PSY-PC 1205. Minds, Brains, Contexts, and Cultures. [Formerly PSYPC 1200] An introduction to the cognitive studies major. Readings,
lectures, and discussions are focused on thinking and understanding,
especially as related to the brain, immediate context, and culture. These
topics are considered from a variety of perspectives, including those
taken from philosophy; literature; cognitive, social, and developmental
psychology; sociology; psychiatry; and cultural anthropology. [3]
PSY-PC 1207. Minds, Brains, Contexts, and Cultures. [Formerly
PSY-PC 1207] An introduction to the cognitive studies major. Readings, lectures, and discussions are focused on thinking and understanding, especially as related to the brain, immediate context, and
culture. These topics are considered from a variety of perspectives,
including those taken from philosophy; literature; cognitive, social, and
developmental psychology; sociology, psychiatry; and cultural anthropology. May be applied toward the Peabody Liberal Education Core
writing requirement. [3]
PSY-PC 1250. Developmental Psychology. [Formerly PSY-PC 1630]
An overview of human development emphasizing the period from conception through adolescence. Course content includes research methods as well as in-depth coverage of selected topics in cognitive, social,
emotional, and physical development. [3]
PSY-PC 2110. Introduction to Statistical Analysis. [Formerly PSYPC 2101] Introductory course emphasizes selection, application, and
interpretation of measures of relative frequency, location, dispersion,
and association. Approaches to statistical inferences are emphasized.
Prerequisite: proficiency in high school algebra. [3]
PSY-PC 2120. Statistical Analysis. [Formerly PSY-PC 2102] Second
course in statistics for undergraduates. Multifactor analysis of variance
designs (including repeated measures), and goodness of fit and contingency analyses. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100. [3]
PSY-PC 2170. Experimental Research Methods in Child Development. [Formerly PSY-PC 2510] Focuses on how experimental methods are used to understand processes of child development. Through
readings, class discussion, writing, and research experiences, the class
considers excellent examples of classic and contemporary experimental studies of child development. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207 or
1250 or PSY 1200 and PSY 2100 or PSY-PC 2110. [3]
PSY-PC 2200. Psychology of Thinking. [Formerly PSY-PC 1600] An
in-depth exploration of theories and basic research concerning how
young adults (i.e., college students) think, reason, and solve problems.
Major topics include memory, categorization, reasoning, decision making, problem solving, and expertise. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207,
or 2250 or PSY 1200. [3]
PSY-PC 2230. Introduction to Educational Neuroscience. Educational neuroscience (ed neuro) is an emerging scientific field that investigates how the brain enables learning. Ed neuro applies the methods
of cognitive neuroscience to questions such as what are the brain systems that allow us to read and do math? How do those systems relate
to general systems such as attention and memory? This course will
provide an introduction to these topics and more, exploring the basics
of how the brain is structured, to how we can use neuroimaging methods to understanding the brain structures and processes that support
learning. At the end of this course you will have a basic understanding
of cognitive neuroscience methods and how they relate to educationally relevant cognitive domains. [3]
PSY-PC 2250. Cognitive Aspects of Human Development. [Formerly PSY-PC 1500] Introduction to research and theory in cognitive
development. Emphasis on infancy and on early and middle childhood.
Topics may include development of language, memory, sensation and
perception, problem solving, concepts and theories, effects of media,
sociocultural support for development, developmental disorders, and
logical mathematical reasoning. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207 or
1250 or PSY 1200. [3]
PSY-PC 2300. Social and Emotional Context of Cognition. [Formerly
PSY-PC 1700] An exploration of such social factors as the individual's
values, beliefs, and emotions and their contributions to the basic cogni-

P

400
tive processes involved in social perception, complex decision making,
and problem solving. Topics include the social construction of perceived
reality, attitude formation and change, heuristics and biases in social
inference, and the role of emotion in coping and problem solving. [3]
PSY-PC 2400. Social and Personality Development. [Formerly
PSY-PC 1750] An overview of basic concepts and current research in
social and personality development. Specific topics include research
methods, development of self, social cognition, achievement motivation, prosocial behavior, moral development, aggression, gender role
development, family and cultural influences. Prerequisite: PSY-PC
1205/1207 or 1250 or PSY 1200. [3]
PSY-PC 2500. Infancy. [Formerly PSY-PC 2250] The behavior and
physiological development of infants reflect a complex interaction
between evolutionary history and genetics, prenatal environmental
influences, and early postnatal experience. An overview of each of
these topics is provided through classroom discussions and reading
assignments focusing on recent empirical studies and major theoretical
issues. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1250. [3]
PSY-PC 2550. Adolescent Development. [Formerly PSY-PC 2320]
Examines theory, research, and other literature pertinent to the development and education of adolescents (ages 12-19). Specific topics
include: cognitive and social development; issues in identity, intimacy,
autonomy, and sexuality; family-adolescent relationships; peer relationships; school achievement and organization; choices and decision
making related to work. [3]
PSY-PC 2560. Theories of Developmental Psychology in Practice.
We will study the grand theories of Developmental Psychology in-depth
to provide a broad conceptual foundation for using Developmental
Psychology in applied careers. Students will also gain familiarity with
current Developmental Psychology concepts relevant to their intended
professional practices. Through disciplined collaborative exchanges,
students will learn about research advances and theoretical perspectives that are relevant to their fields, but not yet well known by practitioners. The term project assignments are designed to provide students the scholarly skills to not only keep up with current research in
Developmental Psychology during their careers, but to seek out new
domains of typical development research to learn from so that they
can be leaders in their fields. For the final paper, students will write an
original scholarly article to engage and inform practitioners. This closely
supervised paper will provide students with individual practice using
portable scholarly strategies to identify key developmental findings and
communicate their importance to other practitioners. [3]
PSY-PC 2600. Educational Psychology. [Formerly PSY-PC 2310]
Examines the applications of psychological theories and research to
teaching and learning settings. Focuses on cognitive development,
problem solving and critical thinking, learning theories, motivation,
social contexts, individual differences, classroom issues, and evaluation issues. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207 or 1250 or PSY 1200. [3]
PSY-PC 3140. Psychology of Language. This course covers the
basics of the psychology of language, understanding the cognitive processes that underlie language production, language comprehension,
and the use of language in society. Through understanding these processes, students will learn ways in which they can improve their own
communication skills. [3]
PSY-PC 3150. Language Development. [Formerly PSY-PC 2000]
An overview of language development with an emphasis on relevant
research in linguistics, developmental psychology, and comparative
psychology. Specific topics covered include research methods, speech
perception, conversational competence, word learning, pragmatic
development, and syntactic competence. The course is intended for
students beyond the first year. [3]
PSY-PC 3200. Introduction to Clinical Psychology. [Formerly PSYPC 2700] This course provides an overview of the science and practice of clinical psychology, with an emphasis on child and adolescent
clinical psychology. Clinical research, psychological assessment, psychotherapy, and related issues will be discussed in class. Students

vanderbilt university
examine the techniques used by clinical psychologists to assess and
treat psychopathology, and research investigating the efficacy of these
techniques. There is an emphasis on experiential learning in the class.
Students will examine the science of clinical psychology by reviewing
research from scientific journals on the effects of a specific type of psychotherapy for a specific psychological disorder. Previous courses in
abnormal psychology and psychological research methods / statistics
are highly recommended. [3]
PSY-PC 3210. Hospitalized Child. This course is designed for individuals who want to know more about the psychosocial needs of children,
adolescents and families in health care settings and situations. Some of
the specific topics covered in this course include: impact of illness and
hospitalization on the family; social and developmental issues and how
they interface with health care; normative development within the hospital; psychosocial roles of various health care team members; preparation of patients and families for health care experiences; utilizing play for
therapeutic purposes; spirituality and its impact on the child and family's
health care experience; the child who is dying; pediatric palliative and
hospice care; an introduction to the field of child life; and an introduction
to the field of pediatric/family advanced practice nursing. [3]
PSY-PC 3650. Advanced Topical Seminar. [Formerly PSY-PC 2100]
An advanced seminar intended for juniors and seniors in which a particular topic within cognitive studies is considered in depth. Topics
vary. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. Prerequisite:
PSY 1200 or PSY 1250 or PSY-PC 1205 or PSY-PC 1207 or PSY-PC
1250. This course is intended for students beyond the first year unless
otherwise specified in the class schedule note. [3]
PSY-PC 3722. Psychometric Methods. [Formerly PSY-PC 2530] Covers the fundamental concepts of psychological measurement and testing, examines a sample of most important psychometric instruments
in current use, provides observation of testing, and considers knowledge essential to making wise use of testing information in research
and applied child development settings. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1250 or
1205/1207 or PSY 1200 and PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100. [3]
PSY-PC 3724. Psychometrics. [Formerly PSY-PC 2540] The basic
objectives of this course are for students to learn the fundamental concepts, methods, and principles of educational and psychological measurement. Particular attention will be devoted to reliability and validity
issues underlying psychometric theory from original sources, and how
psychometric theory relates to the assessment of individual differences
or human psychological diversity more generally. Students should
choose between PSY-PC 3722 and this course inasmuch as credit for
both is not allowed. This course is more demanding in that students will
be reading original sources; it is especially relevant to students seeking
advanced training in the social sciences or research careers. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 and PSY-PC 2120. [3]
PSY-PC 3727. Modern Robust Statistical Methods. [Formerly PSYPC 2550] Covers modern statistical methods designed to handle violations of statistical assumptions that can compromise classic parametric
procedures. More specifically, the student will learn about the classic
assumptions of independence, normality, and equal variances that
underlie many standard procedures, and become familiar with modern
methods that perform vastly better than the classic procedures when
assumptions are violated, yet offer few performance penalties under
many realistic situations where assumptions are violated. Prerequisite:
PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]
PSY-PC 3730. Applied Latent Class and Mixture Modeling. [Formerly PSY-PC 2560] Often social science and educational researchers hypothesize that there are unobserved groups or latent classes of
persons who show different behavioral patterns, or different patterns
of change over time. This course covers mixture models - a statistical approach for assessing the number and size of classes, as well as
class homogeneity or heterogeneity. Longitudinal mixture models are
also used to allow classes to transition between states at different rates
and/or to have different functional forms of change. Prerequisite: PSYPC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

Peabody College / Courses

401

PSY-PC 3732. Latent Growth Curve Modeling. [Formerly PSY-PC
2570] The analysis of longitudinal data (repeated measurements on
the same people over time) is central for evaluating many theories in
social science and educational research. This applied course will focus
on one flexible and powerful approach for analyzing within individual
change over time, and between individual differences in change: the
latent growth curve model. Emphasis will be placed on applications to
real data, interpretation of results, and attaining a solid understanding
of the statistical model. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or
equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120 [3]

the student's interests. Open only to students majoring in child development, child studies, or cognitive studies. May be repeated. Consent
of instructor required. [1-3]

PSY-PC 3735. Correlation and Regression. [Formerly PSY-PC 2580]
Covers modern correlation and regression techniques, including linear regression, multiple regression, polynomial regression, interaction
effects, univariate and multivariate outlier detection, data transformation algorithms, handling of missing data, nonlinear regression, logistic regression, Poisson regression, variable selection procedures, and
regression diagnostics and graphics. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or
PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC 3981. Honors Seminar. [Formerly PSY-PC 2990] Open only
to junior-level students in the Psychology and Human Development
Department Honors Program. [1-3]

PSY-PC 3738. Introduction to Item Response Theory. [Formerly
PSY-PC 2590] Students are introduced to the basic concepts of educational and psychological measurement, classical test theory (CTT),
and item response theory (IRT). These concepts will be taught with
practice by illustrating the construction of tests. Prerequisite: PSY-PC
2110 or PSY 2100 and PSY-PC 3722. [3]
PSY-PC 3743. Factor Analysis. [Formerly PSY-PC 2600] This course
covers primarily Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA), which is extensively
used in psychology, education, medicine, and management to investigate the underlying dimensionality of unobserved constructs (e.g.,
intelligence, psychopathology). The theory behind factor analysis is
covered alongside hands-on application to data, exposure to uses of
factor analysis in the applied literature, and instruction in popular EFA
software. Key topics include model specification, fit and evaluation,
rotation methods, questionnaire development, sample size and power
issues, and extensions to confirmatory factor models. Prerequisite:
PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]
PSY-PC 3746. Multivariate Statistics. [Formerly PSY-PC 2620]
Provides an introduction to matrix algebra and a survey of the class
parametric multivariate techniques that are the foundation of much of
modern multivariate statistics. Emphasis is on techniques that have
wide application in educational and social science research, such as
exploratory factor analysis, structural equation modeling, confirmatory
factor analysis, discriminate analysis, canonical correlation, and multivariate analysis of variance. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or
equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]
PSY-PC 3749. Applied Nonparametric Statistics. [Formerly PSY-PC
2610] This course covers nonparametric statistical methods useful when
the assumptions of ordinary parametric statistics are not met, and for
developing custom statistical techniques useful when other methods do
not exist. Coverage is given to distribution-free procedures, sign tests,
contingency tables, median tests, chi-square and other goodness-of-fit
tests, rank correlations, randomness tests, ordinal regression, Monte
Carlo methods, resampling methods (bootstrap and jackknife), tests of
independence, 1-sample, 2-sample, and k-sample methods, permutation tests, function smoothing, and splines. Emphasis is placed on
underlying theory, application to data, and software. Prerequisite: PSYPC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]
PSY-PC 3850. Independent Study. [Formerly PSY-PC 2970] Development of an independent study project by the individual student under
the direction of a faculty sponsor. Intended primarily for juniors and
seniors. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. May be repeated for credit. [1-3]
PSY-PC 3860. Directed Research. [Formerly PSY-PC 2980] Participation in an empirical research project under the direction of a faculty
sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. May be repeated for credit. [1-3]
PSY-PC 3870. Field Work in Psychology for Undergraduates. [Formerly PSY-PC 2820] Offered to provide field experience appropriate to

PSY-PC 3890. Special Topics in Psychology. [Formerly PSY-PC 2690]
Advanced exploration of a psychological orientation to current issues.
May be repeated with change of topic. [1-4]
PSY-PC 3980. Honors Seminar. [Formerly PSY-PC 2990] Open only
to junior-level students in the Psychology and Human Development
Department Honors Program. [1-3]

PSY-PC 4998. Honors Thesis. [Formerly PSY-PC 2990] Open only
to senior-level students in the Psychology and Human Development
Department Honors Program. [1-3]
PSY-PC 4999. Honors Thesis. [Formerly PSY-PC 2990] Open only
to senior-level students in the Psychology and Human Development
Department Honors Program. [1-3]

Special Education
SPED 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly SPED 1690] Commons
Seminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year students. Students and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized
topic in depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by The Ingram
Commons. General elective credit only. [1]
SPED 1115. Freshman Seminar. [Formerly SPED 1150] Selected Topics for first-year students [3]
SPED 1175. Freshmen Seminar. [Formerly SPED 1000] Provides students with an overview of the undergraduate program in special education. Faculty members from each program area share their experiences
and research projects. Students complete a 15-hour service project
with individuals with disabilities in the community. [1]
SPED 1210. Introduction to Exceptionality. [Formerly SPED 1010]
Examines issues and trends in special education and overviews the
characteristics of persons with disabilities. Covers essential issues
and theories relating to special education and the development of
exceptional persons with special attention to normal and atypical
human development. Multi-cultural, humanistic, and legal issues are
addressed. [3]
SPED 2110. Introduction to Teaching Students with Disabilities.
[Formerly SPED 2010] This course consists of two major components.
The first component focuses on special education law, writing IEPs,
developing lesson plans, effective teaching behaviors, progress monitoring, and methods for grouping students. The second component
provides an overview of instructional models that have empirical support for their effectiveness in teaching students with disabilities. [3]
SPED 2160. Cultural Diversity in American Education. [Formerly
SPED 2060] (Also listed as EDUC 2160) Focuses on cultural diversity
and the ways in which it has been defined and treated in the American educational system. An interdisciplinary perspective informs the
course, with particular attention to history, sociology, psychology,
anthropology, and educational literature. [3]
SPED 2310. Managing Academic and Social Behavior. [Formerly SPED
2110] This course is designed to prepare students to manage classroom
behavior using behavioral principles. Definition and measurement of
behavior, reinforcement strategies, systematic program development,
basic formats for classroom instruction, and techniques for monitoring
student progress are presented. Emphasizes procedures for increasing
academic and socially appropriate behavior through classroom activities. Students apply their skills in classroom settings. Prerequisite: SPED
1210. Corequisite: 1 hour of SPEDH 3871 or SPEDS 3871. [3]
SPED 3240. Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: Educational
Implications. [Formerly SPED 2140] This advanced undergraduate/

P

402
master's-level course will first address the issues and controversies
surrounding the definition, etiology, and identification of Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (AD/HD). Potential relationships or related
issues involving other child characteristics or difficulties, including child
temperament, depression, bipolar disorder, Tourette's Syndrome, and
oppositional-defiant disorder, will be addressed. A major focus of the
course will be working successfully with children with AD/HD in the
school and classroom. A collaborative, multimodal model that involved
parents, general and special education teachers, school psychologists,
and other professionals as appropriate will be emphasized. Integration
of multiple forms of intervention will be explored, including affective,
behavioral, cognitive, social, and medical approaches; discovering
what works for children with AD/HD is an ongoing process that requires
experience, persistence, and collaboration. [3]
SPED 3332. High Poverty Youth: Improving Outcomes. [Formerly
SPED 2080] (Also listed as HOD 2665) Youth from high poverty backgrounds often are placed at risk for a host of unfavorable outcomes
including academic failure, school dropout, drug abuse, unemployment, and incarceration. In this class, we will be working with schools
and community agencies in Nashville to improve outcomes for youth
living in high-poverty neighborhoods. We will have class meetings
weekly as well as ongoing field-based experiences. Field work will
include mentoring, tutoring, or providing job readiness training to youth
in neighborhood community centers or in students' high schools. [3]
SPED 3770. Accommodating Academic Diversity in the Classroom.
[Formerly SPED 2870] Explores the importance and difficulty of teaching heterogeneously grouped students in mainstream classrooms and
offers specific instructional strategies for doing so effectively. Focuses
explicitly and exclusively on methods to help classroom teachers
instruct and manage the behavior of a broad range of students-students with and without disabilities at multiple points along the achievement continuum. [3]
SPED 3850. Independent Study in Special Education. [Formerly
SPED 2960] Semi-independent study of selected topics in special education. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. [1-3]
SPED 3890. Special Topics in Special Education. [Formerly SPED
2690] Study of selected topics or issues related to special education
such as teaching culturally or linguistically diverse learners, accommodating academic diversity in classrooms, or augmentative communication techniques. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. [3]
SPED 3980. Honors Seminar in Special Education. [Formerly SPED
2990] This seminar is completed as part of the Honors Program in
Special Education, which is designed to allow students experiences
working with a faculty member on research activities. The course is
taken during the junior year concurrent with engagement in research
with a faculty mentor's team for at least five hours per week. During
weekly meetings, students will be introduced to various research methodologies, read and discuss articles and studies that use a variety of
research designs, examine and share their roles on a faculty mentor's
team, and ultimately, complete and share an Honors Project at the end
of the spring semester. Acceptance into the Honors Program and permission of the instructor are required. [0-1]
SPED 4950. Student Teaching Seminar. [Formerly SPED 2900] Students complete assignments and structured activities that demonstrate
their ability to apply knowledge, skills, and dispositions acquired during
the core courses and field-based experiences of the special education major. The weekly seminar discussion focuses on understanding
situations and solving problems that naturally occur during the student
teaching experience. Must co-register for either SPED 4954 or 4951 [3]
SPED 4951. Student Teaching in Special Education. [Formerly SPED
2911] Observation, participation, and classroom teaching for undergraduate students in any area of exceptionality. Placements are dependent on license areas. Prerequisite: Admission to student teaching.
Corequisite: SPED 4950. [9]
SPED 4954. Student Teaching in Special Education and Education.
[Formerly SPED 2901] (Also listed as EDUC 4954) Observation, participation, and classroom teaching for undergraduate students in any area

vanderbilt university
of education combined with any area of exceptionality. Placements are
dependent on license and endorsement areas. Prerequisite: Admission
to student teaching. Corequisite: SPED 4950. [9]

Interventionist/High Incidence/Modified
SPEDH 3308. Understanding Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties. [Formerly SPED 2800] This
course has three main components. The first component will focus on
the cognitive, perceptual, language, academic, and social/emotional
characteristics and needs of students with severe and persistent academic and behavior difficulties. The second component will focus on
special education law and developing IEPs. The final component will
focus on developing lesson plans and general strategies for teaching
students with severe and persistent academic and behavior difficulties.
Prerequisite: SPED 1210. [3]
SPEDH 3318. Assessment for Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties. [Formerly SPED 2810]
This course focuses on the diagnosis and evaluation of students with
severe and persistent academic and behavior difficulties using a variety of developmentally appropriate curriculum based measurements,
criterion-referenced, and norm-referenced tests in the academic and
vocational subject areas. Emphasis is on the interpretation of information from assessments into Individualized Education Program annual
goals and objectives and instructional programming strategies. Specific considerations is given to the reporting of assessment information
to parents, teachers and other support personnel to determine appropriate placement levels within the continuum of services. Prerequisite:
SPED 1210. Corequisite: 1 hour of SPED 3871. [3]
SPEDH 3328. Teaching Mathematics to Students with Severe and
Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties: K-8. [Formerly SPED
2820] This methodological course consists of two components. The
first focuses on the possible causes for disabilities in the area of mathematics and assessment of those disabilities. The second emphasizes explicit teaching procedures, direct instruction, and instructional
design principles that apply to teaching mathematics in grades K-8.
Prerequisite: SPED 1210 and 3308. [3]
SPEDH 3338. Teaching Reading to Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties. [Formerly SPED 2830]
Presents empirically validated instructional procedures to address the
reading deficits of students with severe and persistent academic and
behavior difficulties. Integration of explicit teaching procedures, direct
instruction, and instructional design principles that apply to a range
of academic domains are emphasized. Proficiency in the development
of assessment profiles, instructional lessons, monitoring of progress
through curriculum-based measures and data-based decision making
is required. Candidates apply skills in classroom settings. Prerequisite:
SPED 1210 and 3308. Corequisite: 1 hour of SPED 3871. [3]
SPEDH 3348. Language and Learning. [Formerly SPED 2840] This
course examines writing and language development, the written and language difficulties encountered by students with high incidence disabilities, assessment and instruction of writing and language difficulties, as
well as cultural diversity and writing and language differences. [3]
SPEDH 3358. Advanced Reading Methods for Students with Severe
and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties. [Formerly SPED
2850] This course focuses on advanced methods of assessment and
instruction methods related to teaching reading. Candidates in this
course will gain competency in using formative assessments to identify students with severe and persistent reading difficulties, as well as
expertise in and knowledge of teaching approaches and curricula for
improving decoding, vocabulary, fluency, and comprehension abilities.
Prerequisite: SPED 1210 and 3338. Corequisite: 1 hour of SPED 3871. [3]
SPEDH 3368. Teaching Middle School Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties. This middle school course
for teaching students with severe and persistent academic and behavior
difficulties has two components. The first focuses on teaching English
Language Arts across the curriculum at the middle school, including
reading literature and informational text, language development, writing,

Peabody College / Courses
speaking, and listening. The second component focuses on skills needed
for collaborating with other school personnel and preparing students to
transition to high school. [3]
SPEDH 3378. Teaching High School Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties. This is an introductory
course in teaching students with severe and persistent academic and
behavior problems at the high school setting. The first half of the course
covers models of teaching special education at the secondary level,
transition-related legislation, post-school outcomes of high school students with disabilities, and dropout prevention within a context of cultural diversity. The second half focuses on empirically-based secondary special education strategies, including academic/study skills and
accommodations, social skills, self-determination, ITP development,
and career education and employment. [3]
SPEDH 3388. Teaching Mathematics to Students with Severe and
Persistent Academic and Behavior Difficulties 6-12. This mathematics methods course for teaching 6-12th grade students with severe and
persistent academic and behavior difficulties consist of two major components. The first component focuses on the possible causes of math
disabilities and assessment of math disabilities. The second component
emphasizes instructional design principles, explicit teaching procedures,
interventions, and mathematics pedagogy at the secondary level. [3]
SPEDH 3771. Practicum: Accommodating Academic Diversity in
the Classroom. [Formerly SPED 2871] This practicum is designed to
allow students to work with both special educators and general educators regarding the needs of students with disabilities. Emphasis is
placed on accessing the general education curriculum. Corequisite:
SPED 3770 or 3777. [5]
SPEDH 3777. School and Classroom Supports Teaching Students
Academic Behavior Difficulties. [Formerly SPED 2877] This course
focuses on practices to support teaching and learning of students with
severe and persistent academic and behavior difficulties. Core topics
include the following: 1) Effective classroom management to enhance
appropriate behavior, prevent problem behavior, and support students
at-risk for and with behavior difficulties; 2) Research, efficacy and models of co-teaching; 3) Collaboration with colleagues and families; 4)
Technology use to support instruction and accessibility; and 5) Ethical
professional behavior. [3]
SPEDH 3871. Field Work in Special Education for Mild/Moderate
Disabilities. [Formerly SPED 2801] Field-based application of correlated course content to classroom strategies. Planning, implementation, and evaluating instructional procedures for students with mild to
moderate disabilities. May be repeated. Prerequisite: SPED 1210 and
SPED 2110. Fall semester corequisite: SPED 2310, SPEDH 3338 and
3348. Spring semester corequisite: SPEDH 3318, 3328, and 3368. [3]

Severe/Comprehensive
SPEDS 2120. Family Intervention. [Formerly SPED 2020] An overview of different approaches, current issues, and problems involved
in working with and supporting families. Emphasis is placed on how
a child with disabilities affects and is affected by parents, siblings, the
extended family, and the community. Strategies for effective communication for the purpose of information sharing and collaborative planning
with families are provided. [3]
SPEDS 2430. Introduction to Language and Communication. [Formerly SPED 2030] Overview of normal language development, psycholinguistic terminology and research, speech and language disorders
and their remediation, and specific intervention procedures for the
development of speech and language skills in children and youth. [3]
SPEDS 2450. Augmentative and Alternative Communication. [Formerly SPED 2050] This course is designed to provide an overview of the
field of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) for use with
young children and school-age children with severe disabilities. Specifically, the course will provide an overview of the theories that are important to the understanding of appropriate uses of AAC systems, and the
course will provide information about the efficacy of these systems with

403
students with severe disabilities. Topics will include guidelines for selecting, implementing, using, and monitoring the use of AAC systems. [3]
SPEDS 3300. Methods of Instruction for Students with Severe and
Multiple Disabilities. [Formerly SPED 2300] Provides information on
the nature and needs of individuals with severe disabilities and the
roles of federal, state, and local agencies in providing services to this
population. Emphasis is placed on strategies for the acquisition and
generalized use of age appropriate functional skills in natural community-based settings. Methods for developing and implementing individualized programming across specialized curricular areas such as
communicative, cognitive, functional academic, motor, domestic living/
self-help, recreation/leisure, vocational and general community living
skills. Must co-register for SPEDS 3871. [3]
SPEDS 3312. Procedures in Transition to Adult Life. [Formerly SPED
2340] (Also listed as HODC 3312) Overview of history, legislation, and
practice in the areas of community and employment integration for
persons with disabilities. Emphasis on various strategies for promoting a successful transition from school to life. Students are required to
develop instructional plans for integration within the community. Students will apply their skills in community or classroom settings. Prerequisite: SPED 2310. Corequisite: SPEDS 3871. [3]
SPEDS 3330. Characteristics of Students with Severe and Multiple
Disabilities. [Formerly SPED 2330] This course provides information
on the history, nature, characteristics, and needs of students with
exceptionalities. Neurological impairments resulting in motor dysfunction, sensory impairments, and the combination of these are discussed.
Information is provided on the physical, medical, and educational management of students with severe, profound, and multiple disabilities in
educational settings. Corequisite: SPEDS 3871. [3]
SPEDS 3350. Access to General Education and Teaching Functional Academics. [Formerly SPED 2350] The course provides in-depth
information on teaching students with severe disabilities. Emphasis is
on strategies for the acquisition and generalized use of age-appropriate functional skills in natural school and community-based settings.
Methods for developing and implementing individualized programming
across specialized curricular areas such as communicative, cognitive,
functional academic, motor, domestic living/self-help, recreation/leisure, and general community living skills. Current research evidence to
support effective practices is stressed. [3]
SPEDS 3661. Fieldwork in Special Education: Severe Disabilities.
Students will participate in field-work in special education, specifically
in classrooms for students with severe exceptionalities and/or autism.
Students will complete activities tied to a fieldwork in special education seminar. This course may be repeated. Corequisite: SPEDS 3667.
Prerequisite SPED 3871 both fall and spring. [2]
SPEDS 3667. Seminar in Severe Disabilities Fieldwork. Seminar for
undergraduate students related to their field-work in local classrooms
with severe disabilities and/or autism. Students will complete various
assignments and implement them in a classroom setting. This course
may be used to satisfy the Peabody College writing requirement. Prerequisite: SPED 1210, 2120, 2450, SPEDS 3300, 3330, 3312, 3350.
Corequisite: SPEDS 3661. [3]
SPEDS 3871. Field Work in Special Education: Autism, Intellectual,
and Multiple Disabilities. [Formerly SPED 2311] Field-based application of correlated course content to classroom strategies. Planning,
implementation, and evaluating instructional procedures for students
with severe disabilities. May be repeated. Prerequisite: SPED 1210,
SPED 2110, SPED 2430. Fall semester corequisite: SPED 2310, and
SPEDS 3330. Spring semester corequisite: SPED 2450, SPEDS 3312,
and SPED 3328. [3]

Visual Impairment
SPEDV 3305. Medical and Educational Implications of Visual
Impairments. [Formerly SPED 2500] Assessment of sensory function,
including integration of information from medical rehabilitation vision
care specialists, as basis for planning, implementing, and monitoring

P

404
intervention/education for learners with visual impairments. Emphasis is on specific visual disorders, functional use of senses, assistive
technology for enhancing visual function (i.e., optical and non-optical
devices), and family/child characteristics. Linking structure/function
of the visual system to most prevalent visual conditions, identifying
implications of conditions for development and learning, and identifying appropriate accommodations for optimizing visual function. Roles
of teacher of students with visual impairments; medical, educational,
and rehabilitation professionals; families; and other team members in
optimizing outcomes for students with visual impairments. Content
provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, laboratory
dissections, and integrated fieldwork. [3]
SPEDV 3315. Educational Procedures for Students with Visual
Impairments. [Formerly SPED 2510] Introduction to the literature, history, principles, programs, practices, and problems in the field of visual
impairment/blindness. Role of teacher of students with visual impairments
in providing access to the general core curriculum, providing instruction
in the expanded core curriculum for students with visual impairments,
and introduction to assistive technology. Using assessment and data
driven decision making to guide intervention planning, implementation,
and progress monitoring. Course content provided through lectures,
demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. [3]
SPEDV 3335. Braille Reading and Writing. [Formerly SPED 2530] Literary braille code and introduction to Nemeth code for mathematics.
Braille writing and reading proficiency for future teachers of students
with visual impairments. Introduction to strategies for infusing braille
into literacy instruction and technology for producing and accessing
braille. Students read, write, and proofread braille and observe teachers as they teach braille to students with visual impairments. [2]
SPEDV 3345. Communication and Literacy Skills for Students with
Visual Impairments. [Formerly SPED 2540] Promoting/teaching communication and literacy skills, including use of assistive technology for
communication and literacy (augmentative communication devices,
computer-assisted instruction, keyboarding skills, non-optical devices
for enhancing reading and writing, etc.) for students with visual impairments, including those with multiple disabilities. Special emphasis
on learning media assessments; assessment of communication and
literacy skills for intervention planning, implementation, and program
monitoring; accessibility and production of appropriate learning media.
Open only to individuals who have completed or are currently enrolled
in a braille class. Course content provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. Consent of Instructor
required. [3]
SPEDV 3355. Orientation and Mobility for Teachers of Students with
Visual Impairments. [Formerly SPED 2550] Lectures, discussions, and
simulated activities in teaching orientation, mobility concepts and skills
to students with visual impairments. Impact of visual impairment on
motor and cognitive development and strategies for promoting optimal development and learning, sensory use, and independent travel,
including assistive technology. Taught by an orientation and mobility
specialist. Course content provided through lectures, demonstrations,
observations, and integrated fieldwork. [3]
SPEDV 3385. Advanced Procedures for Students with Visual
Impairments. [Formerly SPED 2580] Advanced strategies for providing
access to the general core curriculum and providing instruction in the
expanded core curriculum for students with visual impairments, early
intervention and family-centered practices, with particular emphasis on
assistive technology and universal design for learning. Course content
provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. Prerequisite: SPEDV 3315. [3]

vanderbilt university

Teaching and Learning
Education
EDUC 1001. Commons Seminar. [Formerly EDUC 1690] Commons
Seminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year students. Students and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized
topic in depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by The Ingram
Commons. General elective credit only. [1]
EDUC 1220. Society, the School, and the Teacher. [Formerly EDUC
1020] Introduces the relationship between society's goals and those of
the school. Studies the community setting and the school, the social,
political, and instructional organization of a school, and the roles and
values of a teacher. Field experience. [3]
EDUC 2160. Cultural Diversity in American Education. [Formerly
EDUC 2060] (Also listed as SPED 2060) Focuses on cultural diversity
and the ways in which it has been defined and treated in the American educational system. An interdisciplinary perspective informs the
course, with particular attention to history, sociology, psychology,
anthropology, and educational literatures. [3]
EDUC 3114. Language and Literacy Learning in Young Children.
[Formerly EDUC 2115] Examines sociocultural and cognitive theories
of language learning, theoretical models of the reading and writing
processes, and interconnections between reading, writing, speaking,
and listening. Emphasizes patterns of reading and writing for children
from birth to age 8 and relates these to features of learning environments. Observation and assessment strategies are introduced through
an embedded field experience of six hours which requires working with
preschool-age child in a school setting. [3]
EDUC 3115. Methods of Language and Literacy Instruction in Early
Childhood. [Formerly EDUC 2117] This course introduces methods for
structuring classrooms to teach and assess reading, writing, speaking,
and listening as part of an integrated language arts program for children
from birth through grade 4, with special emphasis on children from birth
to age 8. Corequisite: EDUC 3116 [3]
EDUC 3116. Practicum in Teaching Early Childhood Reading and
Language Arts. [Formerly EDUC 2116] Field experiences in a variety
of early childhood centers or classroom settings designed to provide
practical experience and reflection on the teaching of reading and the
language arts. Corequisite: EDUC 3115. [1]
EDUC 3120. Children in Families and Schools. [Formerly EDUC
2120] Examines the cultural, social-political, historical, and collaborative influences of families and educational institutions on children's
development and learning. Emphasis on understanding family-school
connections and developing partnerships to foster maximum growth
of children. [3]
EDUC 3140. Learning and Development in Early Childhood Education. [Formerly EDUC 2140] Applying an understanding of learning and
development, students examine a variety of early childhood curriculum
models based upon their assumptions about learning and development. Students consider how the role of the classroom teacher and
the establishment of classroom norms are shaped by each curricular
model. An imbedded 20-hour practicum enables students to see different curricular models and to interact with preschool children. [3]
EDUC 3150. Science and Social Studies Instruction in Early Grades.
[Formerly EDUC 2150] This course is designed to prepare prospective
early childhood teachers to provide instruction in science, and social
studies. The course builds on the core content course in science and
social studies in the early childhood program as well as the curriculum
courses for ages 0-3 and age 3-kindergarten. Prerequisite: SSED 2100;
Corequisite: MTED 3150 and EDUC 3151. [3]
EDUC 3151. Practicum in Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies Instruction in Early Grades. [Formerly EDUC 2151] Field experiences in an early grades classroom are designed to provide practical
experience and reflection on the teaching of mathematics, science, and
social studies. Corequisite: EDUC 3150 and MTED 3150. [1]

Peabody College / Courses
EDUC 3180. Managing Instructional Settings for Young Children.
[Formerly EDUC 2180] The purpose of this course is to introduce students
to the social and emotional characteristics of young children that affect
the ways they function in groups, and to acquaint students with planning
and management philosophies and a variety of practices to use in guiding
the behaviors of young children, from infancy through age 8. [2]
EDUC 3212. Introduction to Reading Processes and Assessment.
[Formerly EDUC 2430/2212] Develops an understanding of reading
and of elementary students as readers. Examines theoretical models,
approaches, and the development of reading in elementary classrooms.
Candidates will investigate how children learn to read, explore assessments that reveal student understanding of reading, and apply this
knowledge in scaffolding reading with individual students. Provides informal assessment and teaching experiences within a school setting. [3]
EDUC 3214. Theory and Methods of Reading Instruction in Elementary Schools. [Formerly EDUC 2215] Examines approaches, strategies, and methods for teaching reading in elementary classrooms with
attention paid to philosophies and principles of instructional practice
designed to individualize instruction and support literacy development.
Discusses underlying concepts and theories pertaining to literacy
instruction and relates these to classroom practice. Although grounded
in the philosophy that reading and writing are not discrete entities, the
course focuses on reading. Prerequisite: EDUC 3212; Corequisite:
EDUC 3215 and EDUC 3216. [3]
EDUC 3215. Language Arts in Elementary Schools. [Formerly EDUC
2217] Examines the nature of language development in the elementary
school years with attention paid to principles and practices for teaching
English language arts, particularly related to writing instruction. Consideration of instructional practices designed to individualize instruction
and support literacy development will occur. Prerequisite: EDUC 3212;
Corequisite: EDUC 3214 and EDUC 3216. [3]
EDUC 3216. Practicum in Teaching Elementary Reading and Language Arts. [Formerly EDUC 2216] Field experiences in a variety of
elementary classroom settings designed to provide practical experience and reflection on the teaching of reading and the language arts.
Prerequisite: EDUC 3212; Corequisite: EDUC 3214 and EDUC 3215. [1]
EDUC 3240. Practicum in Elementary Science and Social Studies.
[Formerly EDUC 2210/2240] Field experiences in a variety of school,
grade level, and instructional settings, designed to integrate and apply
teaching skills developed in the elementary science and social studies
methods courses. Corequisite: SCED 3240 and SSED 3240. [1]
EDUC 3270. Managing Instructional Settings. [Formerly EDUC 2270]
Examines several planning and management philosophies and a variety of practices for use with early childhood and/or elementary school
students. [2]
EDUC 3310. Classroom Ecology. [Formerly EDUC 2310] This course
explores how teachers make design choices for an environment that
creates optimal conditions for student learning. Design elements
include social and cultural contexts of learning, social/emotional learning, motivations for learning, and appropriate assessments. This is an
introductory general methods class. Students will take specific methods classes in their area of teaching. [3]
EDUC 3620. Social and Philosophical Aspects of Education. [Formerly EDUC 2920] Exploration of the interaction between contemporary social problems and various philosophies in relation to educational
theory, policy, and practice. [3]
EDUC 3720. Principles for Teaching English Language Learner
Students. [Formerly EDUC 2520] This course, specifically designed for
non-ELL majors, provides an overview of theoretically and empirically
supported practices concerning the education of English language
learners (ELLs) in grades PreK-12. Topics include: the role of second
language acquisition in academic achievement, instructional strategies
for developing English listening, speaking, reading and writing while
accessing the core curriculum, appropriate assessment of ELLs in the
classroom, the importance of ELLs home language and culture, and
ESL research and history relating to policies and programs affecting

405
ELLs. Consideration of how to attain more equitable outcomes for ELLs
through schooling is a major focus of this course. [3]
EDUC 3730. English Language Learner Educational Foundations.
[Formerly EDUC 2530] This course focuses on understanding the processes of second language acquisition, learning, development, and
individual, cognitive, and social factors that influence second language
learning in North America (particularly in the United States). In addition, it examines the theoretical, historical, political, legal, and research
bases for the education of students from linguistically and culturally
diverse populations. Program models and the theoretical bases for
these models are covered in this course. National policies and current
issues relevant to the learning of English language learners are emphasized. Corequisite: 1 hour of EDUC 3731 [3]
EDUC 3731. Practicum for Teaching English Language Learners I.
[Formerly EDUC 2571] A fieldbased practicum working with students
who are English language learners. Experience will include use of students' native languages and/or ESL instructional components. Corequisite: EDUC 3730. [1]
EDUC 3740. English Language Learner Methods and Materials.
[Formerly EDUC 2540] This course focuses on bilingual (native language and ESL) curriculum development and instruction for students
(preK-12) in a variety of language and program settings. Second-language instructional theory and practice, materials selection and development for LEP children, and bilingual and ESL literacy and content
area instruction (mathematics, science, social studies, and English
education) are covered. Frameworks for evaluating curriculum materials and their instructional recommendations for ELL students are provided. Corequisite: 1 hour of EDUC 3742. [3]
EDUC 3742. Practicum for Teaching English Language Learners II.
[Formerly EDUC 2572] A field-based practicum working with students
who are English language learners. Experience will include use of students' native languages and/or ESL instructional components. Corequisite: EDUC 3740. [1]
EDUC 3750. Linguistics and Language Acquisition for English Language Learner Teachers. [Formerly EDUC 2550] This course focuses
on the applying of theories of linguistics and second language acquisition to the teaching of English language learners. Topics covered
include the structure of the English language, English as a system, language acquisition and development, language variation, and theories of
second language acquisition. [3]
EDUC 3760. Assessment of English Language Learners. [Formerly
EDUC 2560] This course focuses on the theoretical and practical aspects
of language testing for second-language learners. Instruments used by
educators to assess the language proficiency and academic achievement of linguistically diverse students are presented and demonstrated.
The course examines the purposes and types of language tests in relation to theories of language use and language teaching goals; discusses
testing practices and procedures related to language teaching and language research; and includes the planning, writing, and administration of
tests, basic descriptive statistics, and test analysis. Rubrics for relating
assessment information to instruction and program planning are developed within this course. Corequisite: 1 hour of EDUC 3763 [3]
EDUC 3763. Practicum for Teaching English Language Learners III.
[Formerly EDUC 2573] A field-based practicum working with students
who are English language learners. Experience will include use of students' native languages and/or ESL instructional components. Corequisite: EDUC 3760. [13]
EDUC 3850. Independent Study in Education. [Formerly EDUC 2960]
Semi-independent study on selected topics in education. Consent of
instructor required. May be repeated. [1-3]
EDUC 3860. Honors Research in Education. [Formerly EDUC 2980]
Individual programs of reading on the conduct of research studies in
education. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. [1-3]
EDUC 3861. Initial Fieldwork in Educational Studies. Field-based
application of Education Studies course work, providing students an
opportunity to integrate and apply theory and practice to learning in

P

406

vanderbilt university

out-of-school settings. S tudents are placed in culturally diverse education settings and are given opportunities to engage in practitioner
observations, learning design and implementation, and guided reflective practice. [3]

ENED 2200. Exploring Literature for Children. [Formerly ENED 2200]
Explores characteristics of good literature for children ages birth to 12,
authors and illustrators of the genre, and issues in the area of children's
literature. [3]

EDUC 3862. Advanced Fieldwork in Educational Studies. A dvanced
experience for Education S tudies course work, providing students an
opportunity to develop independent experience in out-of-school settings and to apply at an advanced level theory and practice to learning in out-of-school settings. S tudents are placed in culturally diverse
education settings and are given opportunities to engage in practitioner
observations, learning design and implementation, and guided reflective practice. [3]

ENED 2300. Pedagogy Seminar. T his pedagogy seminar accompanies
a core course in the College of A rts and S cience and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. S tudents enrolled
in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying
one credit pedagogy seminar. T his optional seminar will be team-taught
by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [1]

EDUC 3871. Practicum in Secondary Education I. [Formerly EDU C
2340] Field experience in middle and secondary school settings.
D esigned for secondary education majors in their sophomore year.
Corequisite: PSY -PC 2550 [1]
EDUC 3872. Practicum in Secondary Education II. [Formerly EDU C
2350] Field experience in middle and secondary school settings.
D esigned for secondary education majors in their junior year. [1]
EDUC 3890. Special Topics in Education. [Formerly EDU C 2690]
Exploration of special issues on topics related to education. May be
repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]
EDUC 4950. Capstone Fieldwork in Educational Studies. Capstone
experience for Education S tudies course work, providing students an
opportunity to develop independent experience in out-of-school settings and to apply at an advanced level theory and practice to learning in out-of-school settings. S tudents are placed in culturally diverse
education settings and are given opportunities to engage in practitioner
observations, learning design and implementation, and guided reflective practice. Capstone experiences should include opportunities for
students to develop, direct or implement learning opportunities with
increasing independence from field partners. [6]
EDUC 4951. Student Teaching in Early Childhood. [Formerly EDU C
2702] Observation and teaching experience for students seeking
PreK-3 licensure. U ndergraduate credit only. Prerequisite: admission
to student teaching. [9]
EDUC 4952. Student Teaching in the Elementary School. [Formerly EDU C 2701] Observation and teaching experience in elementary
schools. U ndergraduate credit only. Prerequisite: A dmission to student
teaching. [9]
EDUC 4953. Student Teaching in the Secondary School. [Formerly EDU C 2703] Observation and teaching experience in secondary
schools. U ndergraduate credit only. Prerequisite: A dmission to student
teaching. [9]
EDUC 4954. Student Teaching in Education and Special Education.
[Formerly EDU C 2704] (A lso listed as S PED 4954) Observation, participation, and classroom teaching for undergraduate students in any area
of education combined with any area of exceptionality. Placements are
dependent on license and endorsement areas. Prerequisite: A dmission
to student teaching. [9]
EDUC 4961. Student Teaching Seminar: Early Childhood. [Formerly
EDU C 2291] S eminar to accompany EDU C 4951. A $300.00 T eacher
Performance A ssessment fee is associated with this course. [3]
EDUC 4962. Student Teaching Seminar: Elementary. [Formerly
EDU C 2290] S eminar to accompany EDU C 4952. A $300.00 T eacher
Performance A ssessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

English Education
ENED 2100. Literature and Drama for Young Children. [Formerly
ENED 2100] Explores characteristics of good literature (with a particular focus on picture books and poetry) for children ages birth to ten,
authors and illustrators of the genre, and issues in the area of literature
for young children. A lso explored is the study of drama as it impacts the
development of young children. [3]

ENED 2430. Fostering Language in Diverse Classrooms. [Formerly
ENED 2030] Overview of language learning, emphasizing ages 3 - 8 and
the role of teachers and parents in fostering growth. V ariability associated with culture, income, home language and individual child characteristics is examined from developmental and sociolinguistic perspectives. S tudents examine language use and teaching as part of an 8 hour
practicum in an early childhood classroom. [3]
ENED 3310. Language Study in the Secondary Classroom. [Formerly ENED 2280] Investigates various methods of approaching grammar, vocabulary spelling, semantics, and bi-dialectism in the English
classroom. For teachers and prospective teachers of middle school
and high school English. [3]
ENED 3340. Reading and Learning with Print and New Media. [Formerly ENED 2320] S tudies print and technology-based approaches to
improving reading and content area learning in grades 6-12 with a special emphasis on diverse learners and struggling readers. D rawing on
research-based practice, students learn to design, enact, and assess
effective reading and literacy instruction. [3]
ENED 3350. Literature, Popular Culture, and New Media. [Formerly
ENED 2920] Examines a wide range of multigenre, multimodal, and
digital texts appropriate for readers of middle school and high school
age. Considers the influence of popular culture and digital technologies
on young adult literature. Includes materials and texts for readers of
various ability levels. [3]
ENED 3357. Literature, Pop Culture, and New Media. Considers the
influence of popular culture and digital technologies on young adult literature and the ways in which societal critique, role of the media, and negotiating identity categories play out in those texts. Examines a wide range
of multigenre, multimodal, and digital fiction focused on various themes
such as R eal and Imagined Worlds: Gaming and T echnology in T exts,
Vampires, Zombies, Werewolves and Monsters: Imagining the Other, and
Who Am I? R ace, Class, Gender, and S exual Identity in L iterature. [3]
ENED 3370. Teaching Literature and New Media in the Secondary
School. [Formerly ENED 2370] S tudents study how pedagogy might
be developed that connects traditional literature instruction with media
popular cultural media. Methods and theories for reading and teaching
short stories, poetry, and novels are juxtaposed and interwoven with
methods and theories for reading and teaching web sites, comics, film,
and other media. Prerequisite: EDU C 3310 or consent of instructor.
Corequisite: ENED 3371. [3]
ENED 3371. Practicum in Secondary Education III. [Formerly ENED
2360] Observation, participation, and teaching in middle school and
secondary school settings. Corequisite: ENED 3370 [1]
ENED 3380. Teaching Writing in Secondary Schools. [Formerly
ENED 2380] D esigned to encourage student teachers to examine the
complexities of teaching writing in middle and high school settings and
to develop a theoretically sound methodology that will allow them to
design meaningful, engaging, and thoughtful writing instruction. [3]
ENED 3400. Harry Potter and Children's Literature. S tudents will
examine British L iterature related to J.K. R owling's novels. S tudents
will be asked to relate what they learn from other children's literature to
the characters, plot, and themes of the Harry Potter novels as well as
the opportunity to perform a variety of critical analyses of a social/cultural phenomena with progressive young adult literature. A dditionally,
students will explore the film versions of all novels discussed to analyze
and critique the adaptations. T his is a weekend course that includes

Peabody College / Courses
week-long travel to the U nited Kingdom where students will engage
in the stories in an experiential journey of local U .K. sites, studios, and
museums. [3]
ENED 3410. Literature of Social Transformation. Historical events,
issues, and movements are often explored in literature for children and
adolescents. T he literature helps make history come alive. T his class
will focus on stories relating to the Civil R ights Movement that led to
social transformation the U nited S tates. In this weekend course, students will explore books written for children/young adults, discuss specific episodes of the Movement where youth had great impact, and visit
libraries, museums, and related sites. [3]
ENED 3850. Independent Study in English Education. [Formerly
ENED 2960] S emi-independent study on selected topics in English education. Consent of supervising instructor required. May be
repeated. [1-3]
ENED 3890. Special Topics in English Education. [Formerly ENED
2690] Exploration of special topics related to English education. May
be repeated with change of topic. [3]
ENED 4963. Student Teaching Seminar: Secondary. [Formerly ENED
2292] S eminar to accompany EDU C 4953. A $300.00 T eacher Performance A ssessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

Foreign Language Education
FLED 3850. Independent Study in Foreign Language Education.
[Formerly FLED 2960] S emi-independent study on selected topics in
foreign language education. May be repeated. Consent of instructor
required. [1-3]

407
to these grades. T he course is prerequisite to MTED 3250 and may be
taken concurrent with MTED 3251. [3]
MTED 2300. Pedagogy Seminar. T his pedagogy seminar accompanies
a core course in the College of A rts and S cience and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. S tudents enrolled
in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying
one credit pedagogy seminar. T his optional seminar will be team-taught
by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [1]
MTED 3150. Mathematics Instruction in the Early Grades. [Formerly MTED 2150] T his course is designed to prepare prospective
early childhood teachers to provide instruction in mathematics. T he
course builds on the core content course in mathematics in the early
childhood program as well as the curriculum courses for ages 0-3
and age 3-kindergarten. Prerequisite: MTED 2100; Corequisite: EDU C
3150 and EDU C 3151. [2]
MTED 3250. Teaching Mathematics in Elementary Schools. [Formerly MTED 2250] T his course is the second in a sequence of courses
designed for those students seeking elementary licensure with an
emphasis on grades 2-5. T his course deals with issues of both content
and pedagogy that are relevant to these grades. T his course may be
taken concurrent with MTED 3251. Prerequisite: MTED 2200. [2]
MTED 3251. Practicum in Elementary Mathematics. [Formerly EDU C
2250/MTED 2251] Field experiences providing students an opportunity
to integrate and apply teaching skills developed in the elementary mathematics course. S tudents are placed in a local elementary school classroom and are given opportunities to engage in classroom observations,
curriculum planning and implementation, and guided reflective practice.
Corequisite: MTED 2200 or MTED 3250. May be taken only once. [1]

FLED 3890. Special Topics in Foreign Language Education. [Formerly FLED 2690] Exploration of special issues or topics related to foreign language education. May be repeated for credit with change of
topic. [1-3]

MTED 3320. Introduction to Literacies in Mathematics. [Formerly
MTED 2690] T his course is intended for licensure candidates in secondary education for mathematics and for other students who want to
explore the concepts and practices of disciplinary literacy that is the
links between content and communication. [3]

Humanities Education

MTED 3360. Computers, Teaching, and Mathematical Visualization.
[Formerly MTED 2800] Examining the 7-14 mathematics curriculum as
a body of ideas that students can develop over time and the use of
computer environments to support teaching and learning them. [3]

HMED 2150. Arts Education for Young Children. [Formerly HMED
2150] T his course is designed to acquaint the early childhood teacher
with concepts, techniques, and materials for creating opportunities for
young children to learn about the visual arts and music. S trategies for
incorporating art activities into group settings will be explored, as well
as accommodating individual differences in young children's interest in
and responsiveness to the arts. [2]
HMED 2250. Introduction to Arts Education. [Formerly HMED 2250]
A cquaints the student with the philosophical and pedagogical base
with which to develop competence in teaching the arts. [2]
HMED 3850. Independent Study in Humanities Education. [Formerly
HMED 2960] S emi-independent study on selected topics in humanities
education. May be repeated. Consent of faculty supervisor required. [1-3]
HMED 3890. Special Topics in Humanities Education. [Formerly
HMED 2690] Explores special topics related to humanities education.
May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]

Mathematics Education
MTED 2100. Young Children's Mathematical Thinking and Learning. [Formerly MTED 2100] T he focus of the course is on ways in which
young children develop increasingly sophisticated additive structures,
including pre-number and early number concepts, place value, strategies for single- and double-digit computation, and measurement. Children's mathematical thinking and learning as well as ways to support
that learning are investigated. T his course is prerequisite to or corequisite with EDU C 3150. T his course is not recommended for freshmen. [3]
MTED 2200. Mathematics for Elementary Teachers. [Formerly MTED
2200] T his course is the first of a sequence designed for those students
seeking elementary licsensure with an emphasis on grades preK-3. T he
course deals with issues of both content and pedagogy that are relevant

MTED 3370. Teaching Mathematics in Secondary Schools. [Formerly MTED 2370] S tudy of conceptual structure, curriculum, objectives, instructional approaches, materials, learning theory, and philosophies of assessment as they relate to teaching mathematics in middle
and secondary schools. Prerequisite: EDU C 3310 or consent of instructor. Corequisite: MTED 3371. [3]
MTED 3371. Practicum in Secondary Education III. [Formerly MTED
2360] Observation, participation, and teaching in middle school and
secondary school settings. Corequisite: MTED 3370 [1]
MTED 3850. Independent Study in Mathematics Education. [Formerly
MTED 2960] S emi-independent study on selected topics in mathematics education. May be repeated. Consent of supervising instructor. [1-3]
MTED 3890. Special Topics in Mathematics Education. [Formerly
MTED 2690] Exploration of special topics related to mathematics education. May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]
MTED 4963. Student Teaching Seminar: Secondary. [Formerly MTED
2292] S eminar to accompany EDU C 4953. A $300.00 T eacher Performance A ssessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

Science Education
SCED 2200. Science for Elementary Teachers. [Formerly S CED 2200]
T his course is designed to examine the relationship between science,
technology, and society. Emphasis will be on relating science concepts
to real world applications, to societal influences and the changing
nature of science. T he role of inquiry in science will be examined and
experienced. A knowledge of introductory earth, biological, and physical science is presumed and will be utilized to present a view of science
as an integrated discipline. [3]

P

408
SCED 2330. Pedagogy Seminar. This pedagogy seminar accompanies
a core course in the College of Arts and Science and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. Students enrolled
in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying
one credit pedagogy seminar. This optional seminar will be team-taught
by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [1]
SCED 3240. Teaching Science in Elementary Schools. [Formerly SCED
2250/2240] Study of the nature of science, discovery (inquiry) teaching and learning, curriculum approaches, goals and standards, trends,
instructional and assessment strategies, and resources and materials for
teaching science in grades K-5, with emphasis on grades 2-5. Prerequisite: SCED 2200. Corequisite: SSED 3240 and EDUC 3240. [2]
SCED 3320. Introduction to Literacies in Science. [Formerly SCED
2690] This course is intended for licensure candidates in secondary
science education and for other students who want to explore the concepts and practices of disciplinary literacy, that is, the links between
content and communication. [3]
SCED 3370. Teaching Science in Secondary Schools. [Formerly
SCED 2370] Study of instructional approaches, materials, curriculum
resources, trends, inquiry teaching and learning, for teaching in secondary schools. Required for secondary school licensure in the sciences. Prerequisite: EDUC 3310 or consent of instructor. Corequisite:
SCED 3371. [3]
SCED 3371. Practicum in Secondary Education III. [Formerly SCED
2360] Observation, participation, and teaching in middle school and
secondary school settings. Corequisite SCED 3370 [1]
SCED 3400. Modeling in the Secondary Science Classroom. This
course is intended for licensure candidates in secondary science education and for other students who want to explore modeling in the secondary science classroom. [3]
SCED 3850. Independent Study in Science Education. [Formerly
SCED 2960] Semi-independent study on selected topics in science education. May be repeated. Consent of supervising instructor
required. [1-3]
SCED 3890. Special Topics in Science Education. [Formerly SCED
2690] Exploration of a special topic related to science education. May
be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]
SCED 4963. Student Teaching Seminar: Secondary. [Formerly SCED
2292] Seminar to accompany EDUC 4953. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

Social Studies Education
SSED 2100. Scientific and Historical Reasoning in Young Children.
[Formerly SSED 2100] This course focuses on issues of the development of subject matter reasoning and understanding in young children.
The course will examine the interplay between informal and formal
experiences that influence the development of scientific and historical
reasoning as children transition from their intuitive theories to a more
formal study of subject matter disciplines. [3]
SSED 2300. Pedagogy Seminar. This pedagogy seminar accompanies
a core course in the College of Arts and Science and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. Students enrolled
in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying
one credit pedagogy seminar. This optional seminar will be team-taught
by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [1]
SSED 3240. Teaching Social Studies in Elementary Schools. [Formerly SSED 2210/2240] Study of conceptual structure of social studies curricula with emphasis on curricular objectives, instructional
approaches, teaching materials, and evaluative strategies focusing on
teaching social studies in grades K-5, with emphasis on grades 2-5.
Corequisite: SCED 3240 and EDUC 3240. [2]

vanderbilt university
SSED 3260. Human Geography. [Formerly SSED 2400] (Also listed as
SSED 6240 for Professional Students) An examination of the human
and cultural aspects of various regions of the world including the spatial manifestations of culture, population distribution and movements,
language, religion, ethnicity, political geography and resource issues.
The course examines human geography themes at local, national and
international levels and probes the nature of geographical thinking and
the characteristics of geography as a social science. [3]
SSED 3320. Introduction to Literacies in the Social Studies. [Formerly SSED 2690] This course is intended for licensure candidates in
secondary education for social studies and for other students who want
to explore the concepts and practices of disciplinary literacy that is the
links between content and communication. [3]
SSED 3370. Teaching Social Studies in Secondary Schools. [Formerly SSED 2370] Instructional principles and techniques of teaching
social studies. Required of students seeking secondary school licensure in social studies, a social science field, or history. Prerequisite:
EDUC 3310 or consent of instructor. Corequisite: SSED 3371. [3]
SSED 3371. Practicum in Secondary Education III. [Formerly SSED
2360] Observation, participation, and teaching in middle school and
secondary school settings. Corequisite: SSED 3370 [1]
SSED 3850. Independent Study in Social Studies Education. [Formerly SSED 2960] Semi-independent study on selected topics in social
studies education. May be repeated. Consent of supervising instructor
required. [1-3]
SSED 3890. Special Topics in Social Studies Education. [Formerly
SSED 2690] Exploration of special topics related to social studies education. May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]
SSED 4963. Student Teaching Seminar: Secondary. [Formerly SSED
2292] Seminar to accompany EDUC 4953. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

Peabody Honor Scholars
PSCH 1110. Peabody Honors Seminar I. Spring seminar for selected
Peabody students. [3]
PSCH 1115. Peabody and Patterson Scholars Seminar. Seminar for
First-year Peabody and Patterson Scholars. Topics will vary. [3]
PSCH 2110. Patterson Scholarship Seminar II. Seminar for Patterson
Scholars in the second year of study. Topics will vary. [0-1]
PSCH 2115. Peabody Scholars Seminar II. Seminar for Peabody
Scholars in the second year of study. Topics vary. [0-3]
PSCH 3110. Patterson Scholars Seminar III. Seminar for Patterson
Scholars in the third year of study. Topics vary. [0-1]
PSCH 4965. Peabody Scholars Capstone Seminar I. Capstone seminar for Peabody Scholars to be taken fall semester of the senior year.
[0-3]
PSCH 4966. Peabody Scholars Capstone Seminar II. Capstone seminar for Peabody Scholars to be taken spring semester of the senior
year. [0-3]

Peabody College / A dministration and Faculty

409

Peabody College
CAMILLA P. BENBOW, Ed.D., Dean
XIU CHEN CRAVENS, Ph.D., Associate Dean for International Affairs
DAVID K. DICKINSON, Ed.D., Associate Dean for Research
JOSEPH F. MURPHY, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Special Projects
MONIQUE ROBINSON-NICHOLS, Ed.D., Associate Dean for Students
and Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion
JACCI L. RODGERS, Ph.D., Associate Dean for External Affairs
SHARON L. SHIELDS, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Professional Education
CRAIG A. SMITH, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Undergraduate Education
BETTY S. LEE, M.Ed., Assistant Dean, Office of Academic Services
DAWN HALE, B.F.A., Assistant to the Dean

Faculty Council
Maury Nation, Deborah Rowe, Megan M. Saylor, Heather L. Smith. Ex
Officio: Camilla P. Benbow.

Endowed Chairs and Named Professorships
Patricia and Rodes Hart Dean of Education and Human Development
Patricia and Rodes Hart Professor of Psychology and Human 			
Development
Patricia and Rodes Hart Professor of Educational Leadership and Policy
Frank W. Mayborn Professor
Dunn Family Chair in Educational and Psychological Assessment, 		
Special Education
Currey-Ingram Chair in Special Education
Nicholas Hobbs Chair in Special Education
Betts Professor of Education and Human Development
Antonio M. and Anita S. Gotto Chair in Teaching and Learning
Margaret Cowan Chair in Teacher Education
Susan Gray Chair in Education and Human Development

Committees of the Faculty Council
Affirmative Action and Diversity
Curriculum
Faculty Affairs
Teaching
Research

Council on Teacher Education
Camilla P. Benbow, Chair.

Faculty
KYLE OWEN ALEXANDER, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.S., M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1998, 1999) [2015]
KAREN E. BACIGALUPO, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Education
B.A. (Lipscomb 1999); M.A. (Tennessee State 2005); Ph.D. (Lipscomb
2014) [2015]
RYAN BALCH, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Policy and Education;
Adjunct Assistant Professor of Psychology
Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 12); B.A. (Duke 2001); M.S.Ed. (Georgia State 2004)
[2014]
SANJANA BALLAL-LINK, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2012) [2016]
ROBERT DALE BALLOU, Associate Professor of Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.A. (Stanford 1972); Ph.D. (Yale 1989) [2002]

MARK BANDAS, Associate Provost; Dean of Students; Assistant
Professor of the Practice of Education
B.A. (Connecticut College 1975); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1985) [1994]
MOLLY A. BARNARD, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
A.M. (Tennessee State 2006) [2017]
SANDRA BARNES, Professor of Sociology of Religion; Professor of
Human and Organizational Development
B.A. (Fisk 1986); M.S. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1989); M.S.
(Interdenominational Theological Center 1995); Ph.D. (Georgia State
1999) [2008]
ERIN ELIZABETH BARTON, Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.S. (Illinois 1999); M.Ed. (DePaul 2002); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007) [2013]
JEROLD P. BAUCH, Professor of Education, Emeritus
B.S. (Wisconsin 1958); M.Ed., Ed.D. (Florida 1964, 1967) [1970]
KATHARINE H. BAUM, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1974); M.A. (Peabody 1975) [2011]
STEVEN R. BAUM, Lecturer in Education
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1973); M.A. (Peabody 1975); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1989)
[2006]
KAREN BELOTE, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.S. (Tennessee 1977); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1993) [2013]
CAMILLA PERSSON BENBOW, Patricia and Rodes Hart Dean of
Education and Human Development; Professor of Psychology
B.A., M.A., M.S., Ed.D. (Johns Hopkins 1977, 1978, 1980, 1981) [1998]
ALLISON BENDER, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Psychology
and Human Development
B.A. (Michigan 1990); M.A., Ph.D. (Hofstra 1992, 1996) [2010]
KIMBERLY D. BESS, Assistant Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (California, Berkeley 1984); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1994, 2006)
[2006]
LEONARD BICKMAN, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus; Research
Professor of Psychology and Human Development
B.S. (City College of New York 1963); M.A. (Columbia 1965); Ph.D.
(CUNY 1969) [1981]
KAREN E. BLANKENSHIP, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Special
Education
B.S. (Vanderbilt 1976); M.S. (New Orleans 1985); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
2004) [2008]
ANGELA BOATMAN, Assistant Professor of Public Policy and Higher
Education
B.A. (Minnesota 2000); M.A., M.P.P. (Michigan 2006, 2006); Ed.D.
(Harvard 2012) [2013]
JESSIKA C. BOLES, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Psychology and
Human Development
B.A. (Rhodes College 2007); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2009); Ph.D. (Memphis
2016) [2017]
ASHLEY C. BOYD, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Baylor 1999); M.A. ( 2003); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2010) [2016]
COREY E. BRADY, Assistant Professor of Learning Sciences
B.A. (Dartmouth 1990); M.S. (Chicago 1993); M.A. (Virginia 1996);
Ph.D. (Dartmouth 2013) [2016]
JOHN M. BRAXTON, Professor of Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
B.A. (Gettysburg 1967); M.A. (Colgate 1968); D.Ed. (Pennsylvania
State 1980) [1992]
PENELOPE H. BROOKS, Professor of Psychology, Emerita
B.A. (Texas 1961); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1964) [1971]
LANA BROWN, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.F.A. (Illinois Wesleyan 1970); M.Ed. (Northwestern 1975) [2009]
SARAH BROWN-SCHMIDT, Associate Professor of Psychology and
Human Development
B.A. (Reed 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Rochester 2004, 2005) [2016]

P

410
L. K. BROWNING, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.S. (Middle Tennessee State 2002); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2005) [2006]
CHARLES W. CAGLE, Adjunct Instructor in Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.S., M.A. (Tennessee Technological 1978, 1980); J.D. (Nashville
School of Law 1989) [2004]
CHRISTOPHER A. CANDELARIA, Assistant Professor of Publlc Policy
and Education
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 2006, 2014, 2016) [2016]
MARISA A. CANNATA, Research Assistant Professor of Leadership,
Policy, and Organizations
B.A. (Stanford 2000); Ph.D. (Michigan State 2007) [2008]
MARK D. CANNON, Associate Professor of Educational Leadership;
Adjunct Professor of Management
B.S., M.S. (Brigham Young 1985, 1987); A.M., Ph.D. (Harvard 1996,
1998) [1998]
ANDREA CAPIZZI, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Special
Education; Director, Undergraduate Studies in Special Education
B.A. (William and Mary 1992); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1994, 2006) [2006]
CHRISTOPHER CARPENTER, Professor of Economics; Professor of Law;
Professor of Public Policy and Education; Professor of Health Policy
B.A. (Albion 1997); Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 2002) [2013]
ASHLEY CARSE, Assistant Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.B.A. (Georgia 1999); M.A. ( 2005); Ph.D. (North Carolina 2011) [2016]
ERIK WILLIAM CARTER, Professor of Special Education
B.A. (Wheaton 1996); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1998, 2004) [2011]
GABRIELLE LYNN CHAPMAN, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human
and Organizational Development
B.A., M.S. (Clemson 1991, 1994); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1999,
2007) [2010]
VERA A. CHATMAN, Professor of the Practice of Human and
Organizational Development, Emerita
B.A., M.A. (Fisk 1970, 1972); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1976) [1994]
THOMAS CHEETHAM, Adjoint Assistant Professor of Psychology and
Human Development
M.D. (McMaster [Canada] 1978) [2011]
BRITTA CHERRY, Adjoint Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S., M.Ed., M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2008, 2009, 2010) [2016]
SUN-JOO CHO, Associate Professor of Psychology
B.A., B.A., M.A. (Yonsei [Korea] 1999, 2001, 2003); Ph.D. (Georgia
2007) [2009]
DOUGLAS L. CHRISTIANSEN, Vice Provost for University Enrollment
Affairs; Dean of Admissions and Financial Aid; Associate Professor of
Public Policy and Higher Education
B.S., M.P.A., Ph.D. (Utah 1988, 2003, 2003) [2006]
MARC CHUN, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.S. (California, Davis 1988); M.A. (Stanford 1989); M.A. (California,
Los Angeles 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 1999, 1999) [1999]
DOUGLAS CLARK, Professor of Science Education
B.A. (North Carolina 1989); M.A. (Stanford 1991); Ph.D. (California,
Berkeley 2000) [2009]
CLARE L. CLARKE, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Teaching and
Learning
A.B. (Princeton 2001); Ed.D. (California, Los Angeles 2012) [2017]
R. WILBURN CLOUSE, Professor of Education, Emeritus
B.A. (Lipscomb 1959); M.A. (Middle Tennessee State 1968); Ph.D.
(Peabody 1977) [1969]
NICOLE COBB, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.S., M.A. (Tennessee Technological 1996, 1998); Ed.D. (Tennessee,
Chattanooga 2011) [2010]
PAUL A. COBB, Professor of Education, Emeritus; Research Professor
of Teaching and Learning
B.S. (Bristol [U.K.] 1975); M.A., Ed.D. (Georgia 1980, 1983) [1992]
DAVID A. COLE, Patricia and Rodes Hart Chair; Professor of Psychology
and Human Development
B.A. (Saint Olaf 1976); M.A., Ph.D. (Houston 1980, 1983) [2001]

vanderbilt university
MOLLY FULLER COLLINS, Lecturer in Education
B.S. (Vanderbilt 1992); M.Ed. (Boston University 1994); M.S. (Kansas
2001); Ed.D. (Boston University 2004) [2011]
BRUCE E. COMPAS, Patricia and Rodes Hart Chair; Professor of
Psychology and Human Development; Professor of Pediatrics
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (California, Los Angeles 1973, 1975, 1980) [2002]
DAVID S. CORDRAY, Professor Emeritus of Psychology
B.A., M.A. (California State 1972, 1974); Ph.D. (Claremont Graduate
1979) [1989]
ANNE L. CORN, Professor of Special Education, Emerita
B.S. (Syracuse 1972); M.A. (California, San Francisco 1973); Ed.M.,
Ed.D. (Columbia 1978, 1980) [1992]
JOSE COSSA, Senior Lecturer in International Education Policy
B.A., M.A. ( 1995, 2000); Ph.D. (Loyola 2007) [2016]
XIU CHEN CRAVENS, Associate Dean for International Affairs; Associate
Professor of the Practice of Educational Policy
B.A. (Peking [China] 1989); M.A. (Tennessee 1992); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt
2008) [2011]
ROBERT L. CROWSON, JR., Professor of Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations, Emeritus
A.B., M.A.T. (Oberlin 1961, 1962); Ph.D. (Chicago 1974) [1993]
JOSEPH J. CUNNINGHAM, Professor of Human and Organizational
Development, Emeritus; Professor of Special Education, Emeritus
B.S., M.S. (Syracuse 1963, 1965); Ed.D. (Illinois 1975) [1969]
LAURIE E. CUTTING, Patricia and Rodes Hart Chair; Professor of Special
Education; Professor of Psychology; Professor of Pediatrics
B.A. (American 1993); M.A., Ph.D. (Northwestern 1995, 1999) [2009]
MARIA ALEXANDRA DA FONTE, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Special Education
M.S., Ph.D. (Purdue 2001, 2008) [2008]
SHANNON MARY DANIEL, Senior Lecturer in Education
B.A. (Pennsylvania State 2004); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Maryland 2008, 2012)
[2012]
ANA CHRISTINA DASILVA IDDINGS, Professor of the Practice of Elective
Learning
B.A. (California State Polytechnic 1991); M.A., Ph.D. (Nevada, Las
Vegas 1996, 2001) [2001]
LYNNETTE DAVIDSON, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
Ed.M. (Vanderbilt 2009) [2017]
GEORGE T. DAVIS, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.A. (South Florida 1977); Ph.D. (Biola 1984); J.D. (Nashville School of
Law 1999) [2004]
G. NICOLE DAVIS, Research Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.A. (Texas A & M 1998); M.A., Ph.D. (Colorado 2005, 2006) [2009]
DAVID K. DICKINSON, Associate Dean for Research and Strategic
Planning; Margaret Cowan Chair in Teacher Education; Professor of
Education
B.A. (Oberlin 1971); Ed.M. (Temple 1976); Ed.D. (Harvard 1982)
[2005]
DAVID K. DIEHL, Assistant Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Michigan 1999); Ph.D. (Stanford 2011) [2014]
AVA D. DIVINEY, Adjunct Instructor in Teaching and Learning
M.Ed. (Trevecca Nazarene 1988) [2011]
PAUL R. DOKECKI, Professor of Human and Organizational
Development, Emeritus; Professor of Psychology, Emeritus; Adjunct
Professor of Human and Organizational Development
B.A. (Manhattan 1962); M.A., Ph.D. (Peabody 1963, 1968) [1970]
SUSAN DOUGLAS, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Psychology;
Senior Lecturer in Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
B.A. (Christian Brothers 1989); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1993, 1999)
[2005]
CORBETTE S. DOYLE, Lecturer in Organizational Studies
B.A. (SUNY, Oswego 1978); M.B.A. (Vanderbilt 1987) [2008]
WILLIAM R. DOYLE, Associate Professor of Higher Education
B.A. (Villanova 1996); Ph.D. (Stanford 2004) [2004]

Peabody College / A dministration and Faculty
JENNI ELIZABETH DUNBAR, Lecturer in Psychology and Human
Development
B.A., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006, 2010, 2015) [2016]
TERESA DUNLEAVY, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Mathematics
Education
Ph.D. (University of Washington 2013) [2015]
HEATHER L. DYE, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.A. (North Carolina 2002); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2004) [2013]
ELISABETH MAY DYKENS, Professor of Psychology and Human
Development; Professor of Pediatrics; Professor of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (Mount Holyoke 1979); M.A., Ph.D. (Kansas 1983, 1985) [2003]
ALLISON EDWARDS, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S. (Northwest Missouri State 1998); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2001) [2010]
MIMI ENGEL, Assistant Professor of Public Policy and Education
B.A. (Illinois 1993); A.M. (Chicago 1998); Ph.D. (Northwestern 2008)
[2009]
AYSU ERDEMIR, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Psychology
M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2010, 2016) [2016]
BRENT J. EVANS, Assistant Professor of Public Policy and Higher
Education
B.A. (Virginia 2002); M.Ed. (Harvard 2006); M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford
2012, 2013) [2013]
CAROLYN M. EVERTSON, Professor of Education, Emerita
B.S., Ph.D. (Texas 1958, 1972) [1984]
JANET S. EYLER, Professor of the Practice of Education, Emerita
B.A., M.Ed. (University of Washington 1966, 1970); Ph.D. (Indiana,
Bloomington 1977) [1976]
DALE CLARK FARRAN, Antonio M. and Anita S. Gotto Chair in Teaching
and Learning; Professor of Education, Emerita; Research Professor of
Teaching and Learning
B.A. (North Carolina 1965); Ph.D. (Bryn Mawr 1975) [1996]
LISA K. FAZIO, Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Washington University 2004); Ph.D. (Duke 2010) [2014]
ANDREW J. FINCH, Associate Professor of the Practice of Human and
Organizational Development
B.S. (Kansas 1991); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1996, 2003) [2004]
DEBORA C. FINCH, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S. (Union College [New York] ); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt ) [2013]
RAE DANIELLE FINNIE, Adjunct Instructor in Teaching and Learning
B.A., M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2004, 2008)) [2017]
JOHN K. FOLGER, Professor of Education, Emeritus
D.Phil. (North Carolina State 1981) [1981]
ANJALI FORBER-PRATT, Assistant Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.S., M.A., Ph.D. (Illinois 2006, 2007, 2012) [2015]
DONNA Y. FORD, Professor of Special Education
B.A., M.Ed., Ph.D. (Cleveland State 1984, 1988, 1991) [2004]
JAMES C. FRASER, Associate Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Georgia 1990); M.A., Ph.D. (Georgia State 1993, 1996) [2007]
GINA FRIEDEN, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Human and
Organizational Development
B.S. (Oklahoma 1978); M.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1981); Ph.D.
(Memphis State 1988) [1994]
SUSAN KRUG FRIEDMAN, Lecturer in Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Wellesley 1972); M.A. (Western Michigan 1977); M.B.A. (Arizona
State 1986) [2000]
DOUGLAS H. FUCHS, Nicholas Hobbs Chair; Professor of Special
Education; Professor of Pediatrics
B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1971); M.S. (Pennsylvania 1973); Ph.D.
(Minnesota 1978) [1985]
LYNN S. FUCHS, Nicholas Hobbs Chair; Professor of Special Education;
Professor of Pediatrics
B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1972); M.S. (Pennsylvania 1973); Ed.S., Ph.D.
(Minnesota 1977, 1981) [1985]
EMILY C. PHILLIPS GALLOWAY, Assistant Professor of Literacy Education
B.A., M.S. (Pennsylvania 2004, 2005); D.Ed. (Harvard 2016) [2016]

411
STACIE J. GAMBLE, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S. (Howard 2000); M.Ed. (Harvard 2006) [2016]
KATHY A. GANSKE, Research Professor of Teaching and Learning
B.A. (Iowa 1973); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Virginia 1988, 1994) [2015]
JUDY GARBER, Professor of Psychology and Human Development;
Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (SUNY, Buffalo 1973); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1987) [1985]
JOHN G. GEER, Vice Provost for Academic and Strategic Affairs;
Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of Political Science; Professor
of Political Science; Professor of Public Policy and Education
B.A. (Franklin and Marshall 1980); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton 1982, 1986)
[1995]
JESSICA GIBBONS-BENTON, Adjunct Instructor in Human and
Organizational Development
Ed.M. (Vanderbilt 2013) [2015]
LEIGH Z. GILCHRIST, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Human and
Organizational Development
B.S., M.Ed., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 1992, 2000, 2007) [2008]
JOANNE W. GOLANN, Assistant Professor of Public Policy and Education
B.A. (Amherst 2004); M.A. (Chicago 2006); M.A., Ph.D. (Princeton
2010, 2015) [2016]
ELLEN B. GOLDRING, Patricia and Rodes Hart Chair; Professor of
Educational Leadership and Policy; Chair of the Department of
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
B.S. (Wisconsin 1978); M.A. (Tel Aviv [Israel] 1982); Ph.D. (Chicago
1985) [1991]
MARK A. GONZALES, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Education
B.B.A. (Angelo State 1990); M.Ed. (Sul Ross State 1995); Ed.D.
(Texas A & M, Kingsville 2003) [2013]
AMANDA P. GOODWIN, Associate Professor of Language, Literacy, and
Culture
B.A. (Princeton 2001); M.S.Ed., Ph.D. (Miami 2005, 2010) [2010]
JOSEPH GORDON, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S. (Georgia 2002); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2005) [2010]
DOUGLAS M. GRANIER, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Teaching and
Learning
B.A. (Saint Joseph Seminary 1973); B.A. (New Orleans 1975); M.A.,
Ph.D. (Louisiana State 1980, 1990) [1991]
MELISSA SOMMERFIELD GRESALFI, Associate Professor of
Mathematics Education
B.A. (Franklin and Marshall 1999); M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 2001, 2004)
[2012]
BRIAN A. GRIFFITH, Associate Clinical Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.S. (Miami [Ohio] 1984); M.Div. (Columbia International 1992); Ph.D.
(South Carolina, Spartanburg 1998) [1998]
JASON A. GRISSOM, Associate Professor of Public Policy and Education
B.S., B.A. (North Carolina State 2001, 2002); M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford
2005, 2007) [2011]
JAMES W. GUTHRIE, Professor of Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations, Emeritus
A.B., M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 1958, 1960, 1968) [1994]
ROGERS HALL, Professor of Education
B.A., M.A. (Houston 1976, 1978); M.S., Ph.D. (California, Irvine 1983,
1990) [2002]
RANDALL K. HARLEY, Professor of Special Education, Emeritus
B.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1949); M.A., Ph.D. (Peabody 1954,
1962) [1964]
JACQUELINE L. HARRIS, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.A. (Tennessee 2004); M.Ed. (Tennessee State 2007) [2015]
VICKI S. HARRIS, Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychology and
Human Development; Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences
B.S. (SUNY, Cortland 1984); M.S., Ph.D. (Pennsylvania State 1987,
1991) [1993]
TED S. HASSELBRING, Professor of Special Education, Emeritus;
Research Professor of Special Education
B.S., M.A.T., Ed.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1971, 1972, 1979) [1982]

P

412
DEBORAH D. HATTON, Associate Professor of Special Education
B.S. (Auburn 1974); M.S. (Florida State 1980); Ph.D. (North Carolina
1995) [2009]
BRANDALYN HAYES, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Teaching and Learning
D.Ed. (Lipscomb 2013) [2016]
CARL HAYWOOD, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
Ph.D. (**Illinois 1961) [1962]
CRAIG ANNE HEFLINGER, Professor of Human and Organizational
Development, Emerita
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1973); M.A. (Peabody 1975); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1989)
[1989]
CAROLYN J. HEINRICH, Patricia and Rodes Hart Chair; Professor of
Public Policy and Education; Professor of Economics
B.A. (Beloit 1989); M.A., Ph.D. (Chicago 1991, 1995) [2015]
IRA HELDERMAN, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.F.A. (New York 1998); M.A. (Trevecca Nazarene 2005); M.A., Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2013, 2016) [2015]
MARY LOUISE HEMMETER, Professor of Special Education
B.S. (Auburn, Montgomery 1984); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1987,
1991) [2005]
ANDREA W. HENRIE, Lecturer in Education
B.S.E., M.Ed. (Freed-Hardeman 1999, 2001); Ph.D. (Tennessee 2008)
[2006]
GARY T. HENRY, Professor of Public Policy and Education
B.A., M.A. (Kentucky, Lexington 1975, 1978); Ph.D. (Wisconsin,
Milwaukee 1992) [2012]
MARGARET HERRON, Adjunct Instructor in Teaching and Learning
B.S., M.Ed. (Middle Tennessee State 1969, 1971) [2013]
BRIAN L. HEUSER, Assistant Professor of the Practice of International
Educational Policy
B.A. (Furman 1996); M.T.S., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 2000, 2007) [2008]
STEPHEN P. HEYNEMAN, Professor of Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations, Emeritus
B.A. (California, Berkeley 1964); M.A. (California, Los Angeles 1965);
Ph.D. (Chicago 1973) [2000]
ROBERT MICHAEL HODAPP, Professor of Special Education; Director of
Graduate Studies in Special Education
A.B. (Columbia College 1977); B.A. (Columbia 1977); M.A., Ph.D.
(Boston University 1981, 1983) [2003]
JAMES H. HOGGE, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A., Ph.D. (Texas 1964, 1966) [1967]
STEVEN D. HOLLON, Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Professor of
Psychology; Professor of Psychology; Professor of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences
B.A. (George Washington 1971); M.S., Ph.D. (Florida State 1974,
1977) [1985]
KATHLEEN V. HOOVER-DEMPSEY, Professor of Psychology, Emerita
A.B. (California, Berkeley 1964); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan State 1969,
1974) [1973]
ILANA SEIDEL HORN, Professor of Mathematics Education
B.A. (Swarthmore 1993); M.A., Ph.D. (California, Berkeley 1998,
2002) [2009]
ANDREW L. HOSTETLER, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Social
Studies Education
B.S. (Kent State 2002); M.Ed. (Ashland 2008); Ph.D. (Kent State
2012) [2012]
NEALETTA J. HOUCHINS-JUAREZ, Instructor in the Practice of Special
Education
B.S. (Florida State 1998); M.A. (Nevada, Reno 2002) [2011]
CAROLYN HUGHES, Professor of Special Education, Emerita
A.B. (California, Berkeley 1969); M.S. (Eastern Montana 1985); Ph.D.
(Illinois 1990) [1991]
MELANIE KITTRELL HUNDLEY, Associate Professor of the Practice of
English Language Arts
B.A. (Wesleyan [Georgia] 1989); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Georgia 2003, 2007)
[2007]
SHANE HUTTON, Lecturer in Psychology
Ph.D. (North Carolina 2015) [2015]

vanderbilt university
BARBARA IDE, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Education
B.S., M.A. (Ball State 1973, 1979); Ed.D. (Trevecca Nazarene 2001)
[2015]
ANNA LEY INGRAHAM, Associate Professor of Health and Physical
Education, Emerita
B.S., M.A. (Peabody 1949, 1954) [1968]
ROBERT B. INNES, Professor of Human and Organizational
Development, Emeritus; Adjunct Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.A., M.A. (Michigan State 1963, 1965); Ph.D. (Michigan 1971) [1971]
ROBERT T. JIMENEZ, Professor of Language, Literacy, and Culture
B.A. (Las Americas [Mexico] 1978); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Illinois 1986, 1992)
[2004]
CAROL RAWLS JOHNSON, Visiting Professor of Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.A. (Fisk 1969); M.A., Ed.D. (Minnesota 1980, 1997) [2014]
HEATHER JO JOHNSON, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Science
Education
M.A.T., B.A. (Virginia 1998, 1998); Ph.D. (Northwestern 2012) [2011]
STACEY MARGARITA JOHNSON, Senior Lecturer in Spanish; Assistant
Director of Center for Teaching; Adjunct Assistant Professor of
Teaching and Learning
B.A. (Union [Tennessee] 1999); M.A., Certificate, Ed.D. (Memphis
2002, 2012, 2012) [2015]
NICOLE JOSEPH, Assistant Professor of Mathematics Education
B.A. (Seattle 1993); M.A. (Pacific Oaks College Northwest 2003);
Ph.D. (University of Washington 2011) [2016]
ANN P. KAISER, Susan Gray Chair in Education and Human
Development; Professor of Special Education
B.S. (Kansas State 1970); M.A., Ph.D. (Kansas 1973, 1974) [1982]
JENNIFER KASEY, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Psychology; Adjunct
Assistant Professor of Human and Organizational Development
B.A. (Virginia 2004); M.A., Psy.D. (James Madison [Virginia] 2007,
2010) [2016]
ANN H. KELLEY, Adjunct Associate Professor of Psychology and Human
Development
D.Phil. (Indiana-Purdue, Fort Wayne ) [2017]
EARLINE D. KENDALL, Professor of the Practice of Early Childhood
Education, Emerita
B.A. (Lipscomb 1957); M.A., Ph.D. (Peabody 1966, 1977) [1992]
ANDREW KIM, Adjunct Instructor in Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
B.A. (Wesleyan 1992); M.P.P. (Duke 1996) [2017]
LESLIE D. KIRBY, Principal Senior Lecturer in Human and Organizational
Development
B.A., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1992, 1996, 1999) [2001]
VICTORIA F. KNIGHT, Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.A. (California, Santa Cruz 1997); M.A. (Northern Colorado 2005);
Ph.D. (North Carolina, Charlotte 2010) [2013]
LOUISE C. KNOWLES, Associate Professor of Health and Physical
Education, Emerita
B.S. (Northeastern Oklahoma State 1942); M.A., Ed.S. (Peabody
1957, 1963) [1965]
SUSAN M. KOCHANOWSKI, Senior Lecturer in Organizational Leadership
B.S. (Southern Mississippi 1981); M.S. (Auburn 1985); M.A. (Lutheran
Theological Southern Seminary 1990); Ph.D. (SUNY, Albany 2008) [2014]
KARA D. KRINKS, Lecturer in Teaching and Learning
B.S. (Lipscomb 1997); M.A.T., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2001, 2003,
2016) [2016]
DAVID LAIRD, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Education
B.A., M.Ed., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 1995, 1997, 2003) [2013]
JOSEPH M. LAMBERT, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Special
Education
B.A. (Brigham Young 2007); M.A. (Northeastern 2009); Ph.D. (Utah
State 2013) [2013]
JONATHAN LANE, Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Florida International 2005); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan 2008, 2011)
[2015]
KEVIN M. LEANDER, Associate Professor of Education; Associate
Professor of English
B.A. (Colorado 1995); M.A., Ph.D. (Illinois 1995, 1999) [1999]

Peabody College / A dministration and Faculty
DANIEL LAWRENCE LEBRETON, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human
and Organizational Development
B.S. (Illinois State 1996); M.S., Ph.D. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute
1999, 2008) [2013]
JENNIFER LEDFORD, Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.A. (Emory 2003); M.Ed. (Georgia 2006); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2012) [2014]
HEATHER CONNELLY LEFKOWITZ, Lecturer in Human and
Organizational Development
A.B., M.Div. (Vanderbilt 1990, 2011) [2015]
DEBORAH LUCAS LEHRER, Lecturer in Education
B.A. (SUNY, Albany 1970); M.Ed. (Edinboro [Pennsylvania] 1971);
B.S. (Wisconsin 1989) [2002]
RICHARD LEHRER, Professor of Teaching and Learning, Emeritus;
Research Professor of Teaching and Learning
B.S. (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 1973); M.S., Ph.D. (SUNY,
Albany 1976, 1983) [2002]
CHRISTOPHER J. LEMONS, Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.A., M.A. (Texas 1996, 1999); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2008) [2013]
TARA ANN LENTZ, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.A. (Wake Forest 2006); M.Div. (Vanderbilt 2011) [2015]
DANIEL T. LEVIN, Professor of Psychology and Human Development;
Director, Graduate Studies in Psychology and Human Development
B.A. (Reed 1989); Ph.D. (Cornell 1997) [2003]
LUIS A. LEYVA, Assistant Professor of Mathematics Education
B.A., Ph.D., Ed.M. (Rutgers 2010, 2016, 2022) [2016]
JAMES LIEBMAN, Instructor in Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
B.A. (Yale 1974); J.D. (Stanford 1977) [2016]
ANNE LINEBERGER, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.S. (Vanderbilt 1982); M.Ed., M.A. (Middle Tennessee State 1988,
1994) [2016]
CLIFFORD LIPPARD, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.A. (Indiana, Bloomington 1988); M.P.A., Ph.D. (Tennessee State
1995, 2009) [2006]
MARK LIPSEY, Director of Peabody Research Institute; Research
Professor of Human and Organizational Development
B.S. (Georgia Institute of Technology 1968); Ph.D. (Johns Hopkins
1972) [1992]
BLAIR PARKER LLOYD, Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.S. (Davidson 2006); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2011, 2013) [2013]
CATHERINE GAVIN LOSS, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Public
Policy and Education
B.A. (Purdue 1992); M.A. (Chicago 1993); Ph.D. (Virginia 2005) [2008]
CHRISTOPHER LOSS, Associate Professor of Public Policy and Higher
Education; Associate Professor of History
B.A. (Pennsylvania State 1994); M.A., M.A., Ph.D., Ph.D. (Virginia
2000, 2001, 2007, 2007) [2007]
DAVID LUBINSKI, Professor of Psychology and Human Development
B.A., Ph.D. (Minnesota 1981, 1987) [1998]
PAMELA MALINOWSKI, Adjunct Instructor in Education
M.S. (Arizona 2011) [2016]
JEANNETTE MANCILLA-MARTINEZ, Associate Professor of Literacy
Instruction
B.A. (Mount Saint Mary’s College 2000); Ed.M., Ed.D. (Harvard 2004,
2009) [2015]
NINA C. MARTIN, Associate Clinical Professor of Psychology and Human
Development
B.A., M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1981, 1985); Ed.M., Ed.D. (Harvard 1990,
1998) [2001]
MICHAEL A. MARTINO, Adjunct Instructor in Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.E. (Pennsylvania State 1978); M.B.A. (Northwestern 1985) [2016]
HOLLY J. MCCAMMON, Cornelius Vanderbilt Chair; Professor of
Sociology; Professor of Law; Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Purdue 1982); A.M., Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1986, 1990) [1990]
EBONY O. MCGEE, Assistant Professor of Diversity and STEM
Education; Assistant Professor of Medicine, Health, and Society
B.S. (North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State 1996); M.S.
(New Jersey Institute of Technology 1998); Ph.D. (Illinois, Chicago
2009) [2012]

413
BRENDA MCKENZIE, Senior Lecturer in Higher Education
B.S. (Oakland 1987); M.Ed., Certificate, D.Phil. (Kent State 1991,
2014, 2015) [2016]
F. JOSEPH MCLAUGHLIN III, Associate Professor of Pediatrics;
Associate Clinical Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Vanderbilt 1971); M.A., Ph.D. (Peabody 1973, 1979) [1981]
CATHERINE MCTAMANEY, Senior Lecturer in Education; Director,
Undergraduate Studies in Teaching and Learning
B.S., M.Ed., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 1994, 1998, 2006) [2006]
JACK W. MILLER, Professor of Education, Emeritus
B.S. (Bemidji State 1956); M.A., Ed.D. (Peabody 1957, 1961) [1962]
CECILIA HYUNJUNG MO, Assistant Professor of Political Science;
Assistant Professor of Public Policy and Education
B.A. (Southern California 2002); M.A. (Loyola Marymount 2004);
M.P.A. (Harvard 2006); Ph.D. (Stanford 2012) [2012]
JESSICA MOONEY, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
Ed.M. (Vanderbilt 2012) [2015]
AMY MOORE, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Lipscomb 2004); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2008) [2013]
DAVID H. MOORE, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Teaching and Learning
D.Ed. (Trevecca Nazarene 2008) [2016]
DEBORAH B. MORRIS, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Education
B.S. (Belmont 1976); M.A. (Central Michigan 2001); Ed.S. (Lincoln
Memorial 2004) [2015]
ELIZABETH MORRIS, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
A.M. (Tennessee Technological 1984) [2015]
JOSEPH F. MURPHY, Associate Dean for Special Projects; Frank W.
Mayborn Chair in Peabody College; Professor of Education
B.A. (Muskingum 1971); M.S.T. (Chicago 1974); Ph.D. (Ohio State
1980) [1988]
VELMA MCBRIDE MURRY, Betts Chair of Education and Human
Development; Professor of Human and Organizational Development;
Professor of Health Policy
B.S. (Tennessee 1974); M.S., Ph.D. (Missouri 1985, 1987) [2008]
CHARLES B. MYERS, Professor of Social Studies Education, Emeritus
B.S. (Pennsylvania State 1961); M.A., Ph.D. (Peabody 1963, 1968)
[1970]
MAURY NATION, Associate Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Georgia State 1992); Ph.D. (South Carolina 1999) [2003]
KRISTEN WEEKS NEAL, Lecturer in Education
B.A. (Miami [Ohio] 1989); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1990, 1999) [2009]
AMY NEEDHAM, Professor of Psychology and Human Development;
Chair, Department of Psychology and Human Development
B.A. (Knox 1987); M.A., Ph.D. (Illinois 1989, 1992) [2009]
ANN M. NEELY, Associate Professor of the Practice of Education
B.S., M.Ed. (Auburn, Montgomery 1977, 1979); Ed.D. (Georgia 1983)
[1985]
ELIZABETH L. NELSON, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.A. (Elon 2006); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2013) [2013]
MICHAEL H. NELSON, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007, 2012) [2017]
CAROL NIXON, Research Assistant Professor of Human Development
Counseling
B.S. (Vanderbilt 1986); M.A. (Middle Tennessee State 1990); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2006) [2011]
NANCY NOLAN, Lecturer in Human and Organizational Development
B.A. (Albion 1984); M.Ed., M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1986, 1993) [2004]
JULIA NOLAND, Senior Lecturer in Psychology
B.A. (Earlham School of Religion 1991); Ph.D. (Cornell 1998) [2003]
LAURA R. NOVICK, Associate Professor of Psychology and Human
Development
B.S. (Iowa 1981); Ph.D. (Stanford 1986) [1988]
IFEOMA NWANKWO, Associate Provost for Strategic Initiatives and
Partnerships; Associate Professor of English; Associate Professor of
American Studies; Associate Professor of Teaching and Learning
B.A. (Rutgers, Camden 1994); Ph.D. (Duke 1999) [2006]

P

414
BRUCE I. OPPENHEIMER, Professor of Political Science; Professor of
Public Policy and Education
A.B. (Tufts 1967); M.A., Ph.D. (Wisconsin 1968, 1973) [1993]
DEBORAH R. OSBORNE, Adjunct Instructor in Human and
Organizational Development
A.B. (Dartmouth 2010); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2015) [2016]
MARIA OSINA, Lecturer in Psychology
M.S., B.S. (Moscow State [Russia] 2005, 2005); M.S., Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2010, 2014) [2015]
AMY B. PALMERI, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Education
B.A. (SUNY, Buffalo 1990); Ph.D. (Indiana, Bloomington 1995) [1995]
BRENNAN MCMAHON PARTON, Adjunct Instructor in Human and
Organizational Development
B.A., M.P.P. (Vanderbilt 2007, 2010) [2016]
PARRISH L. PAUL, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.M. (Louisiana College 1990); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2003); Ph.D.
(Pennsylvania State 2008) [2011]
KIMBERLY J. PAULSEN, Professor of the Practice of Special Education
B.A. (Northern State 1985); M.S. (Moorhead State [Kentucky] 1994);
Ed.D. (Nevada, Las Vegas 1997) [1999]
EMILY PENDERGRASS, Senior Lecturer in Education
B.S. (Tennessee, Chattanooga 1999); M.Ed. (Alabama 2003); Ph.D.
(Georgia 2011) [2011]
RICHARD L. PERCY, Associate Professor of Education, Emeritus
B.A., M.A. (Syracuse 1959, 1968); Ed.D. (Virginia 1971) [1971]
DOUGLAS D. PERKINS, Professor of Human and Organizational
Development; Director, Graduate Studies in Human and
Organizational Development
B.A. (Swarthmore 1980); M.A., Ph.D. (New York 1985, 1990) [2000]
JEANNE H. PETER, Lecturer in Education
B.A. (Southeastern Louisiana 1985); M.Ed., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 1992,
2000) [2002]
REBECCA A. PETERSON, Lecturer in Education; Lecturer in French
B.A. (Taylor 1996); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2002) [2002]
CYNTHIA J. PFISTER, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.A. ( ); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt ) [2015]
GEORGINE PION, Research Associate Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Simpson 1974); M.A., Ph.D. (Claremont Graduate 1977, 1980)
[1989]
SUZANNE PRATT, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S. (Utah State 2004); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2009) [2012]
LISA PRAY, Professor of the Practice of English Language Learners
B.S., M.Ed., Ph.D. (Arizona State 1986, 1998, 2003) [2011]
KRISTOPHER J. PREACHER, Professor of Psychology
B.A. (North Carolina State 1996); M.A. (William and Mary 1998); Ph.D.
(Ohio State 2003) [2011]
WILLIAM D. PREBLE, Adjunct Instructor in Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.A. (Hanover) 1990; M.S.Ed. (Indiana, Bloomington 1993); Ed.D.
(Vanderbilt 2008) [2016]
GAVIN PRICE, Assistant Professor of Psychology
B.S. (York [U.K.] 2003); M.S. (University College London [U.K.] 2004);
Ph.D. (Jyvaskyla [Finland] 2008) [2012]
CHRISTINE M. QUINN TRANK, Associate Professor of the Practice of
Organizational Leadership
B.A., Ph.D. (Iowa 1975, 2001) [2011]
MICHELLE M. REISING, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Psychology
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2005, 2009, 2013) [2015]
DANIEL J. RESCHLY, Professor of Special Education, Emeritus
B.S., M.A. (Iowa State 1966, 1968); Ph.D. (Oregon 1971) [1998]
JOHN J. RIESER, Professor of Psychology and Human Development
A.B. (Harvard 1971); Ph.D. (Minnesota 1978) [1977]
VICTORIA J. RISKO, Professor of Education, Emerita
B.S. (Pittsburgh 1966); M.A., Ed.D. (West Virginia 1969, 1971) [1975]
BETHANY RITTLE-JOHNSON, Professor of Psychology
B.A. (Virginia 1994); M.S., Ph.D. (Carnegie Mellon 1996, 1999) [2002]

vanderbilt university
JILL ROBINSON, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.G.S. (Texas Tech 1998); M.A. (Pennsylvania State 2005); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2013) [2017]
RACHEL B. ROBINSON, Lecturer in Education
B.S. (Florida 2004); M.S. (Florida International 2006); M.S.Ed., Ed.D.
(Pennsylvania 2010, 2011) [2012]
JOSEPH LEE RODGERS III, Lois Autry Betts Professor of Psychology;
Professor of Psychology
B.S., B.A. (Oklahoma 1975, 1975); M.A., Ph.D. (North Carolina 1979,
1981) [2012]
EUNICE C. RODMAN, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S., M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1994, 1995) [2016]
DEBORAH W. ROWE, Professor of Education; Chair of the Department
of Teaching and Learning
B.S. (Kentucky, Lexington 1976); M.Ed. (Wake Forest 1982); Ph.D.
(Indiana, Bloomington 1986) [1986]
DAN RYAN, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.S. (Murray State 1981); M.B.A. (Tennessee State 1987); M.Ed.
(Vanderbilt 1996) [2012]
SARA SAFRANSKY, Assistant Professor of Human and Organizational
Development
Ph.D. (North Carolina 2014) [2015]
HOWARD M. SANDLER, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A. (Johns Hopkins 1967); M.A., Ph.D. (Northwestern 1969, 1971)
[1970]
DAYLE A. SAVAGE, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Education
B.M.Ed. (Bradley 1978); M.Ed., Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 1999, 2005) [2005]
MEGAN M. SAYLOR, Associate Professor of Psychology and Human
Development
B.A. (California, Berkeley 1996); M.S., Ph.D. (Oregon 1997, 2001) [2001]
LEONA SCHAUBLE, Professor of Education, Emerita; Research
Professor of Teaching and Learning
A.B. (Bates 1968); M.A., Ph.D. (Columbia 1981, 1988) [2002]
PATRICK JUDE SCHUERMANN, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Leadership, Policy, and Organizations
B.S., M.A. (Furman 1994, 1999); Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 2006) [2006]
VIRGINIA M. SCOTT, Professor of French; Professor of Teaching and
Learning
B.A. (Eckerd 1973); M.A. (Florida State 1975); Ph.D. (Emory 1987)
[1988]
ELIZABETH ANNE SELF, Lecturer in Teaching and Learning
B.A. (Davidson 2001); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2010, 2016) [2016]
TESHA SENGUPTA-IRVING, Assistant Professor of Mathematics
Education
B.S. (Illinois 1999); D.Phil. (Stanford 2009) [2016]
VIRGINIA L. SHEPHERD, Professor of Education, Emerita; Research
Professor of Teaching and Learning
B.S., M.S., Ph.D. (Iowa 1970, 1972, 1975) [1988]
SHARON L. SHIELDS, Professor of the Practice of Education and
Human Development
B.S., M.Ed. (Louisville 1971, 1974); Ph.D. (Peabody 1976) [1976]
MARYBETH SHINN, Professor of Human, Organizational, and
Community Development
B.A. (Radcliffe 1973); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan 1976, 1978) [2008]
BRENNA TALLY SIMMONS, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.S., M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2000, 2002) [2012]
MARCY SINGER-GABELLA, Professor of the Practice of Education
A.B. (Harvard 1985); M.A. (Columbia 1987); Ph.D. (Stanford 1991) [1991]
CRAIG A. SMITH, Associate Dean for Undergraduate Education;
Associate Professor of Psychology and Human Development
A.B. (Dartmouth 1980); Ph.D. (Stanford 1986) [1988]
HEATHER L. SMITH, Assistant Professor of the Practice of Human and
Organizational Development
B.S. (New Mexico State 1997); M.S. (North Carolina, Greensboro
2003); Ph.D. (Central Florida 2006) [2007]

Peabody College / A dministration and Faculty
CLAIRE E. SMREKAR, Associate Professor of Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.A. (California, Los Angeles 1982); M.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Stanford 1986,
1989, 1991) [1991]
MARK A. SMYLIE, Visiting Professor of Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.A., M.Ed. (Duke 1976, 1977); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1986) [2014]
BROOKE SODEN, Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.A. (Pacific Lutheran 2005); M.S. (Florida State 2010); Ph.D. (Florida
2012) [2014]
ADELA SOLIZ, Assistant Professor of Public Policy and Higher Education
B.A. (Reed 2001); M.A. (Columbia 2006); Ed.D. (Harvard 2015) [2016]
PAUL W. SPEER, Professor of Human and Organizational Development;
Chair of the Department of Human and Organizational Development
B.S. (Baker University 1982); Ph.D. (Missouri, Kansas City 1992) [2001]
MATTHEW G. SPRINGER, Assistant Professor of Public Policy and
Education
B.A. (Denison 1998); Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006) [2006]
TAMRA STAMBAUGH, Director, Program for Talented Youth; Research
Assistant Professor of Special Education
B.A. (Mt. Vernon Nazarene 1991); M.Ed. (Ohio 1997); Ph.D. (William
and Mary 2007) [2009]
SUSAN C. STANDBROOK, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.S. (Belmont 1983); M.Ed. (Trevecca Nazarene 1996) [2014]
MARY PRISCILLA STANDIFER, Adjunct Instructor in Human and
Organizational Development
B.A. (Tennessee 1971); M.S. (Tennessee, Chattanooga 1988) [2011]
JAMES H. STEIGER, Professor of Psychology, Emeritus
B.A. (Cornell 1970); M.S. (Oklahoma 1972); Ph.D. (Purdue 1976) [2003]
BARBARA STENGEL, Professor of the Practice of Education
B.A. (Bucknell 1974); M.A. (Catholic 1976); M.Ed., M.A., Ph.D.
(Pittsburgh 1979, 1984, 1984) [2010]
SONYA STERBA, Associate Professor of Psychology and Human
Development
B.A. (Brown 2002); M.A., Ph.D. (North Carolina 2005, 2010) [2010]
NANCY KAREN STURTEVANT, Adjunct Instructor in Education
B.S., M.A. (Austin Peay State 1981, 1986) [2015]
SARAH VANHOOSER SUITER, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Human and Organizational Development
B.S. (Furman 2001); M.S., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2006, 2009) [2010]
CASEY GILL SUMMAR, Adjunct Professor of Law; Adjunct Instructor in
Human and Organizational Development
B.F.A. (Belmont 2002); J.D. (Vanderbilt 2006) [2010]
EMILY TANNER-SMITH, Research Associate Professor of Human and
Organizational Development
B.S. (Belmont 2003); M.A., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 2007, 2009) [2010]
LEAH TEETERS, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Teaching and Learning
D.Phil. (Colorado 2016) [2017]
JAY H. TIFT, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational Development
B.A. (Puget Sound 2000); M.Ed. (Belmont 2010); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt
2012) [2017]
DEBORAH D. TOBEY, Senior Lecturer in Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.A., M.Ed. (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 1976,
1978); Ed.D. (Vanderbilt 1990) [2017]
KRISTEN C. TOMPKINS, Lecturer in Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Tennessee ); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2001) [2002]
GEORGENE L. TROSETH, Associate Professor of Psychology
B.S. (Wyoming 1994); M.A., Ph.D. (Illinois 1997, 2000) [2000]
NAOMI CHOWDHURI TYLER, Associate Professor of the Practice of
Special Education
B.S., M.A., Ph.D. (New Mexico State 1985, 1988, 1996) [1996]
ATLEE TYREE, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Emory 2010); M.A. (Vanderbilt 2016) [2016]
ANDREW J. VAN SCHAACK, Assistant Professor of the Practice of
Engineering Management; Principal Senior Lecturer in Human and
Organizational Development
B.S., Ph.D. (Utah State 2002, 2006) [2004]

415
EVE VANZANT, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development
B.A. (Virginia 2003); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 2010) [2017]
VIKKI M. VAUGHAN, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.S. (Tennessee 1982); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1985) [2006]
MARY KAY VONA, Adjunct Associate Professor of Leadership and Policy
B.A. (Mercyhurst 1983); M.B.A. (Tampa College 1989); Ed.D. (George
Washington 1997) [2014]
LEIGH WADSWORTH, Senior Lecturer in Psychology
B.A. (Elon 2000); M.A. (Alabama, Huntsville 2002); Ph.D. (Arizona
State 2007) [2006]
TEDRA A. WALDEN, Professor of Psychology and Human Development;
Professor of Hearing and Speech Sciences
B.A., M.A., Ph.D. (Florida 1974, 1976, 1978) [1981]
DOUGLAS WALKER, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.S. (Alabama, Birmingham 1990); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1993) [2012]
JANET J. WALLS, Adjunct Instructor in Human and Organizational
Development; Adjunct Instructor in Leadership, Policy, and
Organizations
B.B.A., M.E. (Belmont 1980, 2011) [2015]
JEANNE WANZEK, Associate Professor of Special Education
B.A., B.S., M.S. (Northern Illinois 1995, 1995, 2000); Ph.D. (Texas
2005) [2015]
ZACHARY E. WARREN, Associate Professor of Pediatrics; Associate
Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; Associate Professor
of Special Education
B.S. (William and Mary 1997); M.S., Ph.D. (Miami 2002, 2005) [2006]
DUANE WATSON, Associate Professor of Psychology and Human
Development
A.B. (Princeton 1998); Ph.D. (Rochester 2002) [2016]
JOSEPH H. WEHBY, Associate Professor of Special Education; Chair of
the Department of Special Education
B.S. (Memphis State 1982); M.Ed., Ph.D. (Vanderbilt 1987, 1990) [1990]
BAHR H. WEISS, Associate Professor of Psychology and Human
Development
A.B. (Michigan 1974); Ph.D. (North Carolina 1988) [1988]
LARISSA N. WESTERFIELD, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Teaching
and Learning
B.A. (Houston Baptist 2003); M.A. (Trevecca Nazarene 2009); Ed.D.
(Lipscomb 2016) [2017]
KAREN WHITE, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.S. (Middle Tennessee State 1987); M.Ed. (Vanderbilt 1987); Ed.S.
(Tennessee Technological 2007) [2014]
ROBERT S. WHITMAN, Professor of English Education, Emeritus
B.A. (Lawrence 1956); M.A., Ph.D. (Illinois 1963, 1973) [1968]
SANDRA JO WILSON, Research Assistant Professor of Special
Education
B.A. (California, Davis 1988); M.S. (San Diego State 1992); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2000) [2000]
MARK WOLERY, Professor of Special Education, Emeritus
B.A. (Tennessee Temple 1969); M.Ed. (Virginia Commonwealth 1975);
Ph.D. (University of Washington 1980) [2000]
SUMMER D. WOOD, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Teaching and
Learning
B.B.A. (Oakwood 2006); M.A.T. (Johns Hopkins 2008); Ph.D.
(Vanderbilt 2015) [2016]
DAVID A. YARIAN, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Psychology and
Human Development
B.A. (Eastern New Mexico, Roswell 1969); M.A., Ph.D. (Michigan
1975, 1982) [1983]
SHARON WEST YATES, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Education
B.A., M.A. (Marshall 1968, 1971); Ed.D. (West Virginia 1990) [2007]
JARED S. YAW, Adjunct Instructor in Special Education
B.S. (Ohio State 2007); M.Sc., Ph.D. (Tennessee 2010, 2013) [2014]
PAUL J. YODER, Professor of Special Education; Research Professor of
Hearing and Speech Sciences
B.S. (Louisiana State 1978); M.S. (Peabody 1979); Ph.D. (North
Carolina 1985) [1986]

P

416

Index
	A	Arts and Science
	B	Blair
	E	Engineering
P
Peabody
3+2 B.Mus./MBA Blair-to-Owen program B246, B254
4+1 B.A./M.A. program A59
Abbreviations B266, E301
Absence from class A63
Academic discipline A69
Academic honors A61, B264, E294, P392
Academic preparation 30
Academic probation A63, A69, B261, E299, P373
Academic progress 39, A66, A69
Academic regulations A63, B257, E296, P368
Academic standards B260
Accelerated Academic Achievement (A3) Center P362
Accelerated graduate program in engineering E293
Account access 37
Accreditation 6, B242, B254, E288, E296, P362, P367
Accreditation, professional E296, P367
Active Citizenship and Service, Office of 11, 28
Activities fee 29, 37, 38
Address change 22, A69, B263, E300
Administration 9, A221, B282, E350, P409
Admission requirements 30
Admission to master’s degree B246, E291
Admission to student teaching B254, P356
Admission to undergraduate teacher education program, formal P366
Admission without diploma 31
Adult program, music B256
Advanced credit 31, E290
Advanced placement 31, A53, A67, B257, E290, E293, P368
Advisers, faculty A49, B257, E296, P368
Advisory services 22
Aerospace studies courses 14
African American and Diaspora Studies A71, A141
Air Force officer education 14
Alpha Lambda Delta A62, P392
Alpha Sigma Mu E294
Alternate track P372
American Studies A72, A143
Anthropology A75, A143
AP examinations 31, A53, A67
Appeal and Reinstatement, financial aid 40
Appeals, academic A70, P373
Application fee 30
Application for admission 30
Application for financial aid 39
Application for teacher licensure B254, P367
Application procedure 30
Arabic A76, A147
Aramaic courses A147
Archaeology—see Anthropology
Architecture, history of, minor A108
Architecture, preparation for study of 12, A57, E309
Area of concentration A54, E310, E315
Army officer education 14
Art A76, A149
Art galleries 29
Art history courses A181
Art studio courses A149
Art Studios, Sarratt 28
Arts advocacy, career development, and entrepreneurship courses B266

vanderbilt university
Arts and Science tutoring A48
Asian Studies A78, A149
Astronomy A123, A150
Athletics 29
Attendance, class A63, B257, E299, P368
Attendance, concert and recital B263
Auditing A63, B260, E298, P370
Audition, Blair 30, 35, B243
Awards and prizes 41, A62, B264, E294, P392
AXLE A50
AXLE curriculum course distribution A53
B.A./M.A. 4+1 program A59
Baccalaureate-MBA Program A58
Bachelor/Master of Engineering E293, E307
Bachelor of Arts A50
Bachelor of Engineering E288, E290, E293, E306, E307, E319
Bachelor of Music B242, B246, B262, P365
Bachelor of Science E288, E290, E293, E312, E317, P364
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science/Master of Science in
Finance E293
Barnes & Noble at Vanderbilt 21
Bicycles 26
Billing, electronic 37
Biochemistry and Chemical Biology A81, A151, A153
Biological Sciences A82, A151
Biomedical Engineering E302
Biomedical engineering courses E325
Bishop Joseph Johnson Black Cultural Center 25
Blair applicants 30, 35
Blair Brass Quintet B242
Blair Commissions: Music for the 21st Century B256
Blair Concert Series B256
Blair/Peabody teacher education program P365
Blair School certificate program B256
Blair String Quartet B242, B256
Blair Woodwind Quintet B242, B256
Blakemore Trio B242, B256
BMI Composer-in-Residence Program B256
B.Mus./MBA Blair-to-Owen program B246, B254
Board of Trust 8
Bookstore, campus 21
Brass performance major B246
Brazilian studies minor A113
Brightspace 7
Business minor 12
Calendar 2
Campus Dining 21
Career Center 23, E289
CASPAR A49, A51
Catalan A134, A153
Center for European and German Studies, Max Kade 18
Center for Latin American Studies 18, A111
Center for Medicine, Health, and Society 18, A117
Center for Research on Rural Families and Communities P362
Center for Student Wellbeing 25
Centers, interdisciplinary 18
Centers and outreach efforts P352
Certification for teaching—see Licensure
Change of address 22, A69, B263, E300
Change of course B258, E298
Change of grade A66, A68, B260, E299
Change period—see Registration
Chaplains 26
Chemical Engineering E304
Chemical and biomolecular engineering courses E328
Chemistry A83, A153
Chi Epsilon E294

Undergraduate Catalog / Index
Child and Family Center 25
Child development major P379
Child development minor P385
Child development/nursing program P380
Child studies five-year B.S./M.Ed. program P393
Child studies major P383
Chinese A78, A155
Cinema and Media Arts A85, A156
Civil Engineering E306
Civil engineering courses E330
Class standing A70, B260, E299, P372
Classical and Mediterranean Studies A85, A157
Classical Hebrew courses A157
Classics courses A157
Classroom Organization and Management Program (COMP) P362
Classroom recording policy A63, B257
Cognitive studies major P384
Cognitive studies minor P385
College of Arts and Science Pre-major Academic Advising
Resources Center (CASPAR) A49, A51
College Scholars program A61
Commencement 2, 7, P374
Committees, faculty A222, B282, E350, P409
Commodore Card 21, 38
Commons—see Ingram Commons
CommonVU orientation 19
Communication of Science and Technology A88, A159, E317
Communication Studies A90, A159
Community service 28
Community Service Officers 27
Complaint and Grievance Procedure 22
Composer-in-Residence, BMI B256
Composition courses B266
Composition major B246
Comprehensive examination A66
Computer Engineering E309
Computer Science E312
Computer science courses E336
Computer science minor E314
Computer science second major for non-engineering students E314
Computing resources 7, A48
Concentration areas, computer engineering E310
Concentration areas, electrical engineering E315
Concentration, materials science and engineering E318
Concentration requirements, music B252
Concert Series, Blair B256
Conduct 19
Conducting courses B266
Confidentiality of student records 21
Construction management five-year program E307
Corporate strategy minor A115
Council on Teacher Education P409
Counseling and advisory services 22
Counseling Center 23
Course changes B258, E298
Course distribution for AXLE A53
Course load A63, B257, E296, P368, P372
Course registration A63, B258
Courses A141, B266, E325, P394
Course work overlap in multiple majors and minors P370
Credit by examination 31, 33, A67, B261, E298, P368
Credit for previous college work 34
Credit hour definition A63, A69, B257, E296, P371
Credit hours outside A&S A50
Crime statistics, campus 27
Creole courses A160
Cultural activities 29
Curriculum A50, B246, E301, P379, P381, P382, P383, P384, P389

417
Dance program 29
Dead week A66, B260, P372
Dean’s List A61, A67, B264, E294, P392
Deans 9
Declaration of major A55, P370
Deficiency notices B259
Degree audit reports A67, B261
Degree audits P365
Degree requirements A50, B246, E298, P386, P387, P390
Degrees offered 6, A50, B242, B246, E288, E290, P364, P393
Dentistry, preparation for study of A57
Departmental honors A61
Department chairs, Blair B282
Department chairs, Engineering E350
Directed study courses A65
Directory information 22
Disabilities, services for students with 23
Discipline, academic A69
Dismissal B261, E299, P373
Distinguished professors and chairs A221, E350
Division of Unclassified Studies (DUS) 24, 35
Doctor of Education (Ed.D.) P393
Doctor of Philosophy (Engineering) E307, E312, E319
Dormitories—see Residential Living
Double and triple majors A54, A55, B245, E292, E303, E305, E315
Drama—see Theatre
Dual degree programs 11, A58, B242, B246, B253, B254, E292, E293
Dual degree program with Fisk University E293
Duplication of course content A65, P372
Dyer Observatory 6
Early childhood education major P386
Early Decision plan 30, 39
Earth and Environmental Sciences A91, A160
Eating on campus 21
E-bill 37
Ecology, evolution, and organismal biology major A83
Economics A93, A162
Economics and History A94
Education and human development P362
Education courses P404
Electrical Engineering E314
Electrical engineering courses E340
Electronic payments 37
Elementary education major P386
Email services 7
Emergency medical care 24
Emergency telephones 27
Employment of graduates 23, E289
Employment, student 23, 40
Endowed chairs, Peabody College P409
Energy and environmental systems minor E309
Engineering, accelerated graduate program in E293
Engineering applicants 30, 35
Engineering Council, Vanderbilt E289
Engineering, double major E292, E293, E303, E305, E315
Engineering five-year programs E292, E293, E307
Engineering equipment fee 37
Engineering management courses E343
Engineering management minor E317, E318
Engineering minor E292
Engineering, preparation for graduate study A57, E288
Engineering Science E317
Engineering science courses E344
English A95, A164
English Language Center 34
Ensembles B242, B243, B256
Ensembles courses B269
Entrance requirements 30

418
Environmental and Sustainability Studies A97, A168
Environmental engineering courses E334
Environmental engineering minor E309
Environmental science minor A93
Environmental sociology major A133
Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Disability Services 23
Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion 6
Escort, security 27
Eta Kappa Nu E294
European Studies A98, A168
Examination, comprehensive A66
Examinations A66, B260, B261, E299, P368
Examinations, missing A67, A68, B260, E297
Exchange programs 10
Expenses, estimate of 37
Experiential Learning Programs 11
Extracurricular activities 27
Extracurricular performance B263
Facilities B242, E288
Faculty advisers A49, A51, B257, E296, P368
Faculty, Arts and Science A222
Faculty, Blair B283
Faculty coordinators, Blair B282
Faculty council A222, P409
Faculty, Engineering E351
Faculty ensembles B242, B256
Faculty, Peabody P409
FAFSA 39, 40
Failure (F grade) A68, E297
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) 21, P365
Family insurance coverage 25
Federal Title IV aid 39, 40
Fees 37, B244, B262, E298
Fifth-year curriculum, music teacher education B254
Film Studies—see Cinema and Media Arts
Final examinations A66
Financial aid 34, 38, 39, 40, B255
Financial aid maximum eligibility 40
Financial aid probation 40
Financial clearance 38
Financial economics A115, A169
Financial information 37
Fine arts—see Art
First-Year Experience 19, 37
First year in engineering E290, E301
First-year seminars B242, P368
First-Year Writing Seminars, A&S A51, B242
Fisk University, courses in African American and Diaspora Studies A71
Fisk University, dual degree program with E293
Five-year Baccalaureate–MBA program A58
Five-year Child Development/Nursing program P380
Five-year Child Studies program P393
Five-year Human and Organizational Development/Nursing program P375
Five-year programs A58, A59, B242, B253, B254, E292, E293, E307,
P375, P380, P393
Food services 21
Foreign language requirement A52, A53
Foreign language requirement for admission 30
Foreign language study, AXLE A52
Formal admission to an undergraduate teacher education program,
Screening I B253, P366
Founder’s medal A61, B264, E294, P392
Four-plus-one B.A./M.A. program A59
Fraternities and sororities 38
French and Italian A101, A169, A185
French courses A169
Freshman honor societies A62, E294, P392
Freshman seminars A51, B242, P368

vanderbilt university
Freshman year, Engineering E290, E301
Full-time status 37, A63
Fundamentals of Engineering examination E296
Gender studies A138, A219
General Engineering E317
General student, music classes for B242
Geology—see Earth and Environmental Sciences
German courses A171
German, Russian and East European Studies A103, A171, A211
Global Education Office 10, A56, B258, E292
Gmail 7
Google services 7
Government, student 21, 27
Grade average requirements A50, A54, E298
Grade changes A66, A68, B260, E298
Grade point average A67, B259, E296, P370
Grade reports A67, B260, E299
Grading system A67, B258, E296, P370
Graduate credit A64, E299, E300
Graduate degrees 6, 12, A57, A58, A59, E290, P393
Graduate Record Examination (GRE) E296
Graduate School credit A64, E300, P369
Graduation P374
Graduation requirements—see Degree requirements
Grants, financial aid 39
Greek A85, A173
Green Dot program 24
Group performance instruction: non-major B243
Group performance instruction: non-major courses B276
Guitar performance major B247
Harp performance major B247
Health Center, Student 24
Health insurance 24, 34, 37
Health physics A125
Health professions 11, A57
Health Professions Advisory Office 11, A57
Health Questionnaire 24
Health services 24
Heard Libraries 6
Hebrew A105, A174
Hillel 26
History A105, A174
History and Culture of the United States, AXLE A53
History of architecture minor A106
History of Art A107, A181
History, Vanderbilt 6, B242, E288, P362
Honor Code 19
Honor scholarships B261, E299
Honor societies A61, A62, B264, E294, P392
Honor system 19, A63, A66, B257, E296, E299, P368
Honors, academic A61, B264, E294, P392
Honors courses A185
Honors, departmental A61
Honors program A109, A185, B264, E292, P375, P379, P383, P384, P388,
P390
Honors program in music literature and history B264
Housing 20
Housing, first-year 20
Housing, upperclass students 20
Human and organizational development courses P394
Human and organizational development major P388
Human and organizational development minor P389
Humanities and the Creative Arts, AXLE A52
Humanities courses A185
Humanities education courses P407

Undergraduate Catalog / Index
Identification card 21, 38
Immigration support and education 25
Immunization requirements 24
Inclusion Initiatives and Cultural Competence 29
Incomplete (I grade) A68, B259, E297, P371
Independent study A65, B262
Individual performance instruction B244
Individual performance instruction courses B276
Individual performance instruction for non-majors B244
Information Technology 7
Ingram Commons 19, 20
Injury and sickness insurance plan 24, 34, 37
Insurance, medical 24, 34, 37
Integrated Bachelor/Master of Engineering E293
Interdisciplinary centers, institutes, and research groups 18
Interdisciplinary majors A54, A55, P377
Interdisciplinary studies A109, A185
International Baccalaureate 33
International cultures, AXLE A52
International English Language Testing System 34, E291
International SOS A52
International Student and Scholar Services 25, 34
International students 25, 34
International studies 10
Internet access 7
Internships 15, A58, B262
Intramurals 28
Intra-university transfer 35, B258
IRIS Center P362
Islamic studies minor A131
ISSS 25, 34
Italian A101, A185
Japanese A78, A186
Jewish Life, Schulman Center for 26
Jewish Studies A109, A187
Joint/dual programs 11, A58, B242, B246, B253, B254, E292, E293,
P375, P380
Journalism 12
Junior and senior recitals B262, B263
Junior mid-program review, Blair B253
Junior standing A70
Kappa Delta Pi P392
Kennedy Center 18, P363
Keyboard harmony courses B269
K’iche’ language courses A189
Language and literacy studies major P377
Late payment of fees 38
Late registration 37
Latin A85, A189
Latin American Studies 18, A111, A190
Latin honors designation A61, B264, E294, P392
Latino and Latina Studies A113, A190
Law, preparation for study of 12, A58
Leadership Development 29
Leave of absence A69, B263, E300, P370, P374
Lectures, public A49
LGBTQI Life, Office of 26
Liberal arts core B251, E291
Liberal arts music major B242, B245
Liberal arts requirement, AXLE A50, A51, A53
Liberal education, about A50
Liberal education core (Peabody) P364, P368, P371, P372, P379,
P383, P386, P389, P390
Libraries 6, B242
Licensure for teaching 12, 58, A137, B253, B254, E292, P365, P367

419
Life at Vanderbilt 19
Living Learning Communities 20
Loan funds 38, 39
M grade A67, B260, E297, P371
Majors A53, A54, B242, B245, B246, E290, P377, P379, P383, P384,
P386, P388, P390, P393
Majors, declaration of A55, P370
Makeup examinations A63, A68
Management, preparation for graduate study in A58
Managerial studies A115, A169, A190
Margaret Cuninggim Women’s Center 26
Marine courses, NROTC 17
Master of Business Administration A58, B246, B254
Master of Education B242, B253, P354, P393
Master of Engineering (M.Eng.) E290, E291, E293, E307, E319
Master of Public Policy (M.P.P.) P393
Master of Science E290, E293, E302, E304, E307, E312, E319
Master of Science in Finance E293
Master of Science in Nursing (M.S.N.) 11, P375, P380
Materials Science and Engineering E318
Materials science and engineering concentration E318
Materials science and engineering courses E345
Materials science and engineering minor E319
Mathematics A115, A191
Mathematics and Natural Sciences, AXLE A53
Mathematics and physics for engineering E291
Mathematics and science studies major P377
Mathematics requirement A53, P369
Matriculation deposit 30, 37
Max Kade Center for European and German Studies 18
Mayfield living/learning lodges 21
Maymester 36
M.B.A., dual program A58, B246, B254
McGill Project 20
McTyeire House 20, A101, A103, A135
Meal plans 21
Mechanical Engineering E319
Mechanical engineering courses E346
Medals, university 41
Medical and health physics A125
Medical services 24
Medicine, Health, and Society 18, A117, A194
Medicine, preparation for study of 11, A57
MI grade A68, B252, P371
Mid-semester progress reports A66
Military science courses 15, A197, P398
Minimum GPA in major A54
Minimum requirements A63, A69
Minors A56, B242, B244, B252, E292, E309, E314, E317, E318, E319,
E322, E323, P385, P389, P391
Missing final exam and other work (MI grade) A68, B260, P371
Missing final exam (M grade) A67, B260, E297, P371
Mission, university 6
Molecular and cellular biology major A82
Molecular Biology—see Biological Sciences
Multiple majors and minors, Peabody College P370
Music B242
Musical activities 29
Musical arts majors B247
Musical arts/teacher education major B247, B248
Music as a second major B244
Music composition minor B244
Music concentrations B252
Music courses, other B273
Music fees B244, B261, B262
Music for the general student B242
Music history minor B244

420
Musicianship courses B269
Musicians’ wellness courses B275
Music, liberal arts major in B242, B245
Music Library, Anne Potter Wilson B242
Music library staff B282
Music literature and history courses B271
Music, majors in B242, B244, B246
Music, minors in B242, B244, B252
Music performance minor B244
Music, second major in B245
Music theory courses B274
Named and distinguished chairs and professorships A221, E350, P409
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology course E349
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology minor A120, E322
National Center for Leadership in Intensive Intervention P362
National Center on Performance Incentives P362
National Center on Scaling Up Effective Schools P363
Natural science requirement A53
Natural science studies major P377
Naval officer education 16
Naval science courses 17, A197, P399
Need-based financial aid 38
Neuroscience A121, A197
Next Steps at Vanderbilt P363
No-credit courses A64, B260
Nondiscrimination, anti-harassment, anti-retaliation 23
Normal course load A63, B257, E296, E300, P368, P372
Nursing, graduate programs in 11, A57, P375, P380
Nursing, preparation for study of 11, A57, P375, P380
Office of LGBTQI Life 26
Officer education courses, credit for E291
Officer education programs 14, 15, 16
Official university communications 19
Open electives E291
Open enrollment period B258
Opera Theatre, Vanderbilt B243
Orchestral repertoire and instrument literature courses B267
Orchestras, Vanderbilt B243
Order of the Engineer E289
Organ performance major B249
Orientation 19
Overseas programs 10, A52, A54, A56, E345, P370
Owen School, dual degree program with A58, B254, E293
Parking on campus 26
Pass/Fail option A64, A66, B259, E296, P370
Payment options 37, 38
Peabody applicants 30, 35
Peabody Honor Scholars courses P408
Peabody Journal of Education P363
Peabody Professional Institutes P363
Peabody Research Institute P363
Peabody Scholars program P375
Pedagogy courses, music B267
People Finder 22
Percussion performance major B249
Performance classes B281
Performance instruction, B.Mus. B262
Performance instruction courses B276
Performance instruction, non-majors B243, B244
Performance major B262
Performing groups, student 28, B243
Perspectives, AXLE A53
Petitions and appeals A70, P373
Phi Beta Kappa A61
Phi Eta Sigma A62, P392

vanderbilt university
Philosophy A122, A198
Phone service 7
Physics and Astronomy A123, A150, A200
Physics courses A200
Piano performance major B249
Pi Kappa Lambda B264
Pi Tau Sigma E294
Police department 26
Political Science A125, A202
Portuguese A134, A205
Post-baccalaureate programs P375, P393
Pre-architecture program 12, A57, E309
Precollege credit 34, B256, B257
Precollege program, music B256
Precollege summer school 34
Predental studies A57
Prelaw studies 12, A58
Premedical studies 11, A57
Prenursing studies 11, A57
Pre-professional studies 11, A57
Pre-recital hearing B262
Principals Leadership Academy of Nashville P363
Prior degrees 35
Privacy of student information 21
Prizes, university 41, A62, B264, E294
Probation, academic A63, A69, A70, B261, E299, P373
Probation, financial aid 40
Professional registration E296
Professional societies, engineering E289
Program of concentration—see Majors
Progress evaluation A66, P372
Progress reports, mid-semester A66
Project Safe Center 24
Psychological and Counseling Center 23
Psychology A127, A206
Psychology and human development courses P399
Publications, student 28
Public Policy Studies A128, A207
Quantitative methods minor P385
Radio stations, student 28
Rand Hall 28
Readmission A69, A70
Recital attendance B263
Recital committee B263
Recitals B262, B263
Recording policy, classroom A63, B257
Records, student 21
Recreation and sports 28
Recreation center 28, 38
Recreation fee 28, 36, 38
Re-examination A66, E297
Re-examination, senior A66, B262, E297, P370
Refunds, tuition and housing 37
Registration 2, 38, A65, B258, E298
Change period A64, B258, E289, E298
Registration, professional, engineering E296
Regulations, academic A63, B257, E296
Reinstatement and appeal procedures 40
Religious life 26
Religious Studies A129, A207
Repeated courses A65, B260, E297, P372
Research, undergraduate A56, E288
Reserving credit for graduate school E300
Residence requirements 10, 20, A68, B257, E299, P368
Residential education administration 21
Residential living 20

Undergraduate Catalog / Index
ResNet 7, 20
Responsibility to be informed E296
Returning after leave of absence A70
Room assignments 21
ROTC 14, 15, 16
Russian A103, A211
Sarratt Art Studios 29
Sarratt Student Center/Rand Hall 28
SAT, note regarding 31
Satisfactory academic progress 39
Scholarship requirements 30, B261, E299
Scholarships and loans 38
Scholarships, Blair B255, B261
School of Nursing P375, P380
Schools of the university 6
Schulman Center for Jewish Life 26
Science education courses P379
Scientific computing courses E349
Scientific computing minor A131, E323
Screening for teacher education B253, P365, P366
Secondary education major P387
Second language studies major P378
Second major in computer science for non-engineering students E314
Second major in music B245
Second majors, A&S A55
Second majors, Peabody College P370
Security, campus 26
Security clearance for student teaching P365
Security notices 27
Semester out of residence B258
Semester requirements, academic A69
Semester work at another institution A68, B258
Seminars, First-Year Writing A51, B242
Seminars, freshman A51, P368
Senior-in-absentia 11, 37, A69
Senior re-examination A66, B262, E297, P370
Senior standing A70
Service learning 28
Sigma Xi E294
Social and Behavioral Sciences, AXLE A53
Social studies major P378
Sociology A132, A212
Software store 7
Solo recitals B262
Sophomore standing A70
Sororities and fraternities 38
Southeastern Conference 29
Spanish and Portuguese A134, A153, A205, A215
Spanish courses A215
Special education courses P401
Special education major P390
Special education minor P391
Specializations, special education P390
Special programs 10, B256, E292, P375
Speech—see Communication Studies
Sports and recreation 28
String performance major B250
Student accountability 19
Student accounts 37
Student centers 28
Student conduct 19
Student employment 23, 40
Student ensembles B243
Student governance 21, 27
Student Handbook 19, 20, 22, 38
Student Health Center 24
Student Life Center 28

421
Student publications 28
Student records (FERPA) 21
Student recreation center 28, 38
Student services 21
Student teaching B254, P366, P367
Studio art courses A148
Study abroad programs 10, A52, A54, A56, B258, E292, E345, P370
Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth P363
Sudden academic insufficiency B261, P373
Summer courses off campus B257, P369
Summer programs 10, 34, 36
Summer school, precollege 34
Summer session 36
Summer work at another institution 34, A68, B257, E298, P369
Supporting departments, engineering E288
Supporting organizations, engineering E289
Susan Gray School for Children P363
Tau Beta Pi E294
Teacher education 12, A58, A137, B242, B253, B254, E292, P364
Teacher education courses, music B268
Teacher licensure—see Licensure for teaching
Teaching and learning courses P404
Tech Hub 7
Television station, student 28
TeleVU 20
Temporary grades A67, B259, E297, P371
Test of English as a Foreign Language 34, E291
Theatre 29, A137, A218
Three-two programs B253, B254, E292
Tibetan language courses A219
Transcripts 30, 31, 35, 37, 38
Transfer credit 10, 14, 35, A54, A68, B257, B258, E298, P364, P369
Transfer, intra-university 35
Transfer students 19, 21, 35, B257, B258, E298, P364
Transfer student transition programs 19
Triple majors A54, A55
Tuition and fees; payment programs 37
Tuition and financial aid B255
Tuition refunds 37, 38
Tutoring, Arts and Science A48
Unclassified Studies, Division of 24, 34, 35
Undergraduate business minor 12
Undergraduate enrollment for graduate credit E299, P369
Undergraduate enrollment for independent study P369
Undergraduate enrollment for post-baccalaureate credit P369
Undergraduate enrollment in 5000–8000-level courses P369
Undergraduate enrollment in graduate courses A64, E299, P369
Undergraduate housing 20
Undergraduate research A56, E288
University Chaplain and Religious Life, Office of 26
University Courses 13
University recommendation for licensure P367
Upper divisional hearing, music performance majors B262
Vanderbilt Center for Science Outreach P363
Vanderbilt Dance Program 29
Vanderbilt Engineering Council E289
Vanderbilt Institute for Nanoscience and Engineering (VINSE) E318, E322
Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development 18, P363
Vanderbilt Programs for Talented Youth P363
Vanderbilt Recreation and Wellness Center 28, 38
Vanderbilt Student Communications, Inc. 28
Vanderbilt Student Government (VSG) 21, 27
Vanderbilt Visions program 19
Vandy Plan 38
Vandy Vans 27

422
Varsity sports 29
Vehicle registration 26
Visiting campus 30
Visiting students 35
Voice performance major B250
Volunteer activities 11, 28
VUIT 7
VUnet 7
Waiver, fees 30, 31
Waiver, health insurance 25
Wireless access to ResNet 20
Wireless devices 7
Withdrawal from courses A66, B259, E298, P372
Withdrawal from the university 37, 38, A69, B263, E300, P374
Women’s and Gender Studies A138, A219
Women’s Center, Margaret Cuninggim 26
Wond’ry 18
Woodwind performance major B250
Work at another institution A53, A67, B258, E298, P369
Work-study program 10, 39
Writing portfolio B260
Writing requirement A50, A51, B251, P368, P379, P383, P384, P386,
P389, P390
Writing Studio 28, A48
YES (Your Enrollment Services) 7, 19, 22, 37, A53, A67, B258, E298, E299

vanderbilt university

